DEAN OF STUDENTS OFFICE 
Rensselaer Handbook of Student 
Rights and Responsibilities 
Rev.  January 6, 2025 
Rensselaer Handbook of Student Rights and Responsibilities, rev. January 6, 2025 Page 2 
 
RENSSELAER HANDBOOK OF STUDENT RIGHTS AND RESPONSIBILITIES  
Introduction 3 
STUDENT BILL OF RIGHTS 4 
Article I: Name and Purpose 4 
Article II: Freedom of Access to Higher Education at Rensselaer 4 
Article III: Student – Teacher Relationship 5 
Article IV: Confidentiality of Student Records 5 
Article V: Freedom in Student Life 5 
Article VI: Off – Campus Freedom of Students 6 
Article VII: Procedural Standards in Disciplinary Proceedings 7 
THE JUDICIAL SYSTEM AND DISCIPLINARY ACTION 8 
Student Conduct for Individuals and Groups 8 
Grounds for Disciplinary Action 8 
Jurisdiction within the Rensselaer Student Judicial System (Approved, Student Senate, 3/4/2013) 10 
Components of the Judicial System 10 
Legal Counsel 14 
Types of Disciplinary Action 14 
Policy on Transcript Notation (Suspensions and Expulsions) 15 
Temporary Actions 16 
ADDITIONAL POLICIES 17 
Community Health Emergencies Statement 17 
Academic Integrity 17 
Non-Discrimination/Harassment Prevention/Equal Opportunity Policy 20 
Student Policy on Acts of Bias, Discriminatory Behavior and Harassment 20 
Sexual Misconduct Policy 23 
Title IX Coordinators 25 
Notice Pursuant to the "Campus Sex Crimes Prevention Act" and Campus Crime Reporting and Statistics 25 
(Online, Campus Crime Statistics: https://publicsafety.rpi.edu/reports ) 
(Online, NY Sex Offender Registry: http://www.criminaljustice.ny.gov/nsor/)  
Alcohol and Other Drugs Policy 26 
(Online Policy: https://info.rpi.edu/dean-students/student-rights-responsibilities-and-conduct ) 
Institute Regulations on Alcohol 27 
Institute Regulations on Other Drugs 29 
Enforcement of Regulations on Other Drugs 30 
Good Samaritan Policy 32 
Policy on Tobacco Use and Smoking 33 
Student Living and Learning Policies 34 
Network and System Use at Rensselaer- Cyber Citizenship Policy 34 
(Online Policy:https://policy.rpi.edu/policy/cyber-citizenship) 
Technology Commercialization and Intellectual Property 35 
(Online Policy: https://research.rpi.edu/policy) 
Unmanned Aerial Vehicles (UAVs) 35 
Family Education of Rights and Privacy Act (FERPA) 37 
Fire Alarms and Procedures 38 
Security Technology, Access Control System, and Emergency Phones 39 
Hazing 39 
Exotic Dancers 39 
Fog Events 39 
Campus Card (ID) 39 
Involuntary Leaves and Withdrawals 40 
Leave of Absence after Significant Physical or Emotional Trauma or Illness 40 
Parking Rules and Regulations 40 
(Online Policy: https://info.rpi.edu/parking-and-transportation/parking) 
Rules for Maintenance of Public Order 41 
Sign Policy 43 
Steam Tunnels, Designated Confined Spaces and Roofs 45 
Use of Institute Buildings and Facilities 45 
Solicitation and Distribution Policy 45 
Rensselaer Union Policies 46 
INDEX 48 
INTRODUCTION 
The Rensselaer Handbook of Student Rights and Responsibilities (Handbook) is a reflection of the values, 
beliefs and expectations we have as a community of scholars. The Handbook lays out both the rights and the 
responsibilities of students at Rensselaer to help ensure mutual respect, integrity, and an environment where 
all students can effectively pursue their educational goals. 
All Rensselaer students are expected to comply with the rules and regulations set forth in the Handbook, as 
well as with the requirements set forth in other Institute policies and rules. Compliance with the requirements 
of this Handbook are also conditions of occupancy for all residents in campus housing – in addition to the 
contractual terms set forth in room and board contracts. 
It is each student’s responsibility to be familiar with the contents of this Handbook, and other policies of the 
Institute. 
Notice regarding changes: Review of this Handbook will commence at least annually. Rensselaer reserves the 
right to change any regulation or policy affecting its students, including those set forth in this Handbook, as well 
as any tuition and fees, room and board costs, academic standards and requirements, or any rules governing 
admission, occupancy of residence halls, or the granting of degrees at any time. Changes to this Handbook will 
be communicated to the Rensselaer community. Such communication will include access to the updated 
Handbook. 
This Handbook is effective as of the revision date noted, and it replaces and supersedes any and all prior 
versions of the Handbook.  In cases where the Handbook summarizes other Institute policies, if there is 
any conflict between the summary in the Handbook and the text of the actual policy, the actual policy 
language will prevail.  
Questions and concerns about this Handbook should be addressed to the Dean of Students Office. 
Dean of Students Office 
Academy Hall, Suite 4629 
Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute 
110 8th Street 
Troy, NY 12180-3590 USA 
Page 3 
Rensselaer Handbook of Student Rights and Responsibilities, rev. January 6, 2025 
Rensselaer Handbook of Student Rights and Responsibilities, rev. January 6, 2025 Page 4 
 
STUDENT BILL OF RIGHTS 
 
 
ARTICLE I: NAME AND PURPOSE 
 
Section A: The name of this document is the Rensselaer Student Bill of Rights. 
 
Section B: The student is a citizen of the nation at large, and the Institute shall not impede or obstruct students 
in the exercise of their fundamental rights as citizens. It is the purpose of this document to set forth ways in which 
these rights, , are applied to student members of the Rensselaer community. 
 
ARTICLE II: FREEDOM OF ACCESS TO HIGHER EDUCATION AT RENSSELAER 
 
Section A: The Institute shall state, in a specific written document, the characteristics and expectations and 
responsibilities of students which it considers relevant to success in the institution's programs. The Institute shall 
be open to all students who are qualified according to its admission standards, barring no one on the basis of 
race, color, religion, sex, pregnancy, sexual orientation, gender identity, gender expression, age, marital status, 
national origin, citizenship status, disability, military status, veteran status, prior criminal convictions, genetic 
information, genetic predisposition, domestic violence victim, or any other basis prohibited by law. 
Efforts shall also be made to seek out and admit students of diverse socioeconomic backgrounds whose 
potential could be reached through a Rensselaer education. Prospective students may, before entering the 
Institute, request Institute regulations, contractual rights, obligations and responsibilities. 
 
Section B: The facilities and services which are normally available to students under the rules and regulations 
of the Institute shall be open to all of its students without regard to race, color, religion, sex, pregnancy, sexual 
orientation, gender identity, gender expression, age, marital status, national origin, citizenship status, disability, 
military status, veteran status, genetic information, genetic predisposition, domestic violence victim status, or 
any other basis prohibited by law. Age or year in school shall not be used arbitrarily as a basis for discrimination, 
but there may be valid reasons for differential access based on educational goals or allocation of resources. The 
Institute shall endeavor to secure equal access for all students to public facilities in the local community. 
 
STATEMENT OF ADOPTION BY THE TRUSTEES 
The Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute Student Bill of Rights has been considered by the Trustees. 
 
In order to safeguard the rights of all members of the Institute community, certain specific rules and 
regulations are necessary. Recognition of the Student Bill of Rights as herein expressed is not intended to 
limit or restrict the ultimate responsibility and authority of the Board of Trustees to promulgate and enforce 
rules and regulations reasonably consistent with the general principles set forth in the Student Bill of Rights, 
which the Board of Trustees deems necessary and appropriate to the Rensselaer community. 
 
By its very nature, the Student Bill of Rights cannot be successful without corresponding student 
responsibilities and obligations which, although they have not been spelled out in the document, must of 
necessity be considered a part of it and without which it cannot succeed. 
 
In adopting the document in principle, the Trustees wish to make clear to all concerned that their primary 
obligation, duty and concern is in the best interest of Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute as an educational 
institution and that this document, like all other policy statements and decisions concerning the Institute, is 
subject to the continuing paramount control of the Board of Trustees. 
 
Under no circumstances shall student fees or other Institute funds be used to promote, prosecute, initiate, or 
defend an adversary proceeding against the Institute without written consent of the Institute. 
The Sexual Misconduct Bill of Rights is located in the Sexual Misconduct Policy (https://sexualviolence.rpi.edu) and on Page 41 
in this Handbook. 
Section C: Every prospective student shall have the right to a written explanation of the basis of eligibility for 
financial aid, and the requirements for continuation. In addition, recipients of such aid shall be provided an 
explanation of the reasons for change in financial aid that may occur in subsequent years. 
ARTICLE III: STUDENT – TEACHER RELATIONSHIP 
Section A: The professor in the classroom and in conference shall encourage free discussion, inquiry, and 
expression. Students shall be free to take reasoned exception to the data or views offered in any course of study 
and to reserve judgment about matters of opinion. 
Section B: Students have the right to be informed about the content and educational intent of a course, 
and about the procedures and standards by which they are to be evaluated. Accordingly, at the beginning 
of each course, students should be provided with: 
1. A syllabus of the course including content and objectives as appropriate. 
2. The policies which govern various factors used in the evaluation process along with a description of the 
method by which the final grade will be determined. Factors to consider include homework, examinations, 
projects, papers, laboratory work, and attendance. Should changes in the content, procedures, or standards 
become necessary, the reasons for these changes should be explained to the class. 
3. A statement of definition of academic dishonesty where such may be open to question. Particular attention 
should be paid to collaboration on out-of-class assignments. The official policy, with regard to academic 
dishonesty, can be found in this handbook. 
Section C: Student performance in coursework shall be evaluated on an academic basis, not on opinions or 
conduct in matters unrelated to academic standards. Students shall have protection through orderly 
procedures against prejudiced or capricious evaluation. 
Section D: Information about student activities, views, beliefs, and political associations which professors 
acquire in the course of their work as instructors, advisers, and counselors shall be considered confidential. 
Persons who provide confidential statements or written judgments of ability and character in connection with an 
application in which the student gives express permission for the release of such information are responsible to 
the recipient and to the subject equally to be honest and fair in their judgment. 
ARTICLE IV: CONFIDENTIALITY OF STUDENT RECORDS 
The Institute shall publish an explicit policy statement as to the information which is a part of a student's 
permanent official educational record and the conditions of, and process for, its disclosure. To minimize the 
risk of improper disclosure, academic, financial, disciplinary, and medical records shall be separate, and the 
conditions of access to each shall be published in an explicit policy statement. Transcripts of academic records 
shall contain only information about academic status, and the student and their adviser shall have the right to 
see these records at any time. Information from student records shall be available only to authorized persons 
as determined by the Institute or legal regulations. Other persons, both on campus and off, shall have access 
to such records only with the express permission of the student. No educational records shall be kept which 
reflect as such the political activities or beliefs of students. Provisions shall also be made for periodic 
destruction of inactive non-academic and nonfinancial records. The student shall have the right to view and 
contest the contents of their official Institute records, except those relating to their admissions application and all 
records of the psychological counseling and medical services, regardless of where such records may be 
physically located. 
ARTICLE V: FREEDOM IN STUDENT LIFE 
Section A: (1) Students shall be free to organize and join lawful associations to promote their common interests. 
The policies and actions of a student organization will be determined by the membership within the limits 
established by the Rensselaer Union (Institute student body) and other appropriate bodies within the Institute. 
Page 5 
Rensselaer Handbook of Student Rights and Responsibilities, rev. January 6, 2025 
Affiliation with an extramural organization shall not of itself disqualify a student organization from recognition by 
the Rensselaer Union. In order to receive Rensselaer Union recognition, student organizations may be required 
to submit a statement of purpose, criteria for membership, rule of procedure, and a current list of officers. All 
Rensselaer Union organizations, including those affiliated with an extramural organization, shall be open to all 
eligible students without discrimination. Recognition shall not imply approval or disapproval of an organization's 
aims, objectives, or policies. (2) The denial of access to facilities or reduction of resources shall not be used by 
the Institute or the Rensselaer Union as a means of censorship or suppression of any lawful activity. 
Rensselaer Union building facilities shall be available for the use of all members of the Institute community, 
subject to rules of use implemented by the Institute and Rensselaer Union. 
Section B: (1) Students and student groups shall be free to examine and discuss all questions of interest to 
them and to express opinions publicly and privately. They shall be free to support causes by orderly means, 
including peaceful assembly, which do not disrupt the normal operation of the Institute. Unless otherwise 
authorized, students and student groups speak only for themselves in their public expressions or demonstrations. 
(2) Students and student groups shall be allowed to invite and to hear any person of their own choosing. Such 
students and groups shall have an affirmative obligation to comply with Institute procedures which are designed 
to ensure that for such an event there is adequate preparation and security, and that such an event is conducted 
in a manner appropriate to an academic community. The sponsors of any event shall make clear to the academic 
and at-large communities that such sponsorship does not necessarily imply approval or endorsements of the 
views expressed, either by the sponsoring group or by the Institute. 
Section C: In the delegation of editorial responsibility to individual students, the Rensselaer Union shall provide 
sufficient editorial freedom for the student publications and other media to maintain their integrity of purpose as 
vehicles for responsible free expression in an academic community. To this end, the Rensselaer Union shall 
provide written clarification of the role of student media, the standards to be used in their evaluation, and the 
limitations on control of their operation. Editors and managers of student media shall be free from arbitrary 
disciplinary action, suspension or removal because of student, faculty, administrative, or public disapproval of 
editorial policy or content. Only for proper and stated causes, shall editors and managers be subject to removal, 
and then only by orderly and prescribed procedures as established by the Rensselaer Union. All Rensselaer 
Union published and financed student media shall explicitly state on the editorial or in other appropriate fashion 
that the opinions expressed there are not necessarily those of the Institute or student body. 
Section D: Students shall be free, individually and collectively, to express their views on issues of institutional 
policy and on matters of general interest to the student body. The student body shall have a means of providing 
input on institutional policy affecting academic and student affairs. The role of student government and both its 
general and specific responsibilities shall be made explicit, and the actions of the student government within the 
areas of its jurisdiction shall be reviewed through orderly prescribed procedures. 
ARTICLE VI: OFF – CAMPUS FREEDOM OF STUDENTS 
Section A: The Institute's students are both citizens of the nation at large and members of the academic 
community. As citizens, students shall enjoy the same freedom of speech, peaceful assembly, and right of 
petition that other citizens enjoy. Off-campus and on-campus, students are expected to conduct themselves in 
a civil, respectful and lawful manner. 
Section B: When the activities of students result in apparent violation of the law, staff from the Division of Student 
Experience, the Rensselaer Union, Public Safety, and other appropriate administrative offices shall be 
available to apprise the students of sources of legal counsel and other sources of assistance. Students who 
violate the law may incur penalties prescribed by civil authorities but Institute authority shall not attempt to 
duplicate the function of public authority. Rensselaer reserves the right to address off-campus student conduct 
which violates Rensselaer's Grounds for Disciplinary Action through the Institute's judicial process. 
No student's status at Rensselaer shall be altered on the basis of pending legal action or conviction for any crime, 
Page 6 
Rensselaer Handbook of Student Rights and Responsibilities, rev. January 6, 2025 
except when the presence of such student could constitute a danger to the safety of person or property on the 
premises of the Institute or the student's behavior is otherwise subject to the jurisdiction of Rensselaer as set forth 
in this Student Bill of Rights. Institutional action shall be independent of community pressure. 
ARTICLE VII: PROCEDURAL STANDARDS IN DISCIPLINARY PROCEEDINGS 
Section A: The administration of discipline shall provide procedural fairness to an accused student. 
Thus, each Institute regulation shall be as clear and specific as possible, and shall be clearly communicated to 
the student body. The Institute shall initiate disciplinary action for conduct including that which could be a threat 
to the personal safety of members of the academic community, conduct that endangers property, and/or 
conduct that is disruptive to the educational and administrative processes of the Institute. Disciplinary 
procedures shall take into account the case circumstances in particular, and each accused student shall be 
entitled to an individual inquiry/hearing. The jurisdiction of campus judicial bodies, the disciplinary 
responsibilities of institutional officials, and the disciplinary procedures, including the student's right to appeal a 
decision, shall be clearly formulated and available in advance. Penalties shall be imposed or assessed under 
prescribed procedures. 
Section B: The student shall be informed of the nature of the charges against them and shall be given a fair 
opportunity to refute them. Neither the Institute nor any of its judicial bodies shall be arbitrary in its actions and 
there shall be provisions for the appeal of the initial decision. Except in extraordinary circumstances, standards 
of conduct will be formulated with input from student leaders, published, and communicated to the student 
community in advance through such means as a student handbook or a generally available body of institutional 
rules. 
Section C: Premises occupied by, and personal property of, students shall not be searched (as distinguished 
from ordinary maintenance activities) or seized without an externally issued search warrant or its internally issued 
equivalent based on comparable standards, or without the student's knowledge and approval of the search, 
except in cases where Institute officials have a reasonable basis for believing that safety is involved. For premises 
not controlled by the Institute, the ordinary requirements for lawful search shall be followed. 
Section D: Students detected or charged in the course of serious violation of institutional regulations or 
infractions of ordinary law shall be informed of their rights. No form of harassment shall be used by Institute 
representatives to coerce admissions of guilt or information about conduct or about other suspected persons. 
Section E: During the investigative process, a student may be placed on an interim suspension by the 
Director of Student Rights, Responsibilities and Conduct when the continued presence of such student, or 
the participation by such student in Institute instruction or activities, could constitute a danger to the security, 
health, or safety of members of the Rensselaer community, or of person or property on the premises of the 
Institute. During an interim suspension, a student shall be denied access to campus, including classes, 
academic facilities, residence halls, and all other Institute activities or privileges for which the student might 
otherwise be eligible. The interim suspension does not replace the regular conduct process, which shall 
proceed on the normal schedule. In the event of an interim suspension, the student may request a review of 
the need for the interim suspension and submit evidence in support of their request.  Requests for review of 
the interim suspension must be submitted in writing to the Dean of Students, who will conduct a review within 
five Institute business days after said request is received. 
Page 7 
Rensselaer Handbook of Student Rights and Responsibilities, rev. January 6, 2025 
THE JUDICIAL SYSTEM AND DISCIPLINARY ACTION 
STUDENT CONDUCT FOR INDIVIDUALS AND GROUPS 
When people gather together in communities, their rights as individuals may not be exercised in the same fashion 
as they might otherwise. Individuals' rights impinge upon each other and laws are established in the larger society 
to govern in such cases. At Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute, these regulations are set forth so that individuals 
will be aware of their responsibilities and be able to exercise their rights individually and collectively as stated in 
the Student Bill of Rights. Out of concern for individuality and respect for student privacy, Rensselaer does not 
seek to impose a common morality on all students. At the same time, the Institute has the responsibility to 
establish certain standards of conduct within the campus community. 
In general, Institute regulations are concerned with conduct on the campus, but students must recognize that 
whether on-campus or off-campus, they are subject to local, state, and federal laws. Their responsibilities as 
citizens require that they conform to these laws, realizing that Rensselaer will not make any effort to protect 
students who violate their citizenship obligations from the consequences. At the same time, the Institute is 
concerned with the student's rights as a citizen with equal protection under the law. 
Any invasion of individual rights of privacy or activity that causes suffering or extreme physical exhaustion, or 
grave personal offense, or that interferes with scholastic work, or that constitutes any danger to person or 
property (including but not limited to activities commonly referred to as “hazing”) is strictly forbidden, whether 
the conduct occurs on-campus or off-campus. 
Except as prescribed in this Student Bill of Rights, off-campus misconduct will not typically be the basis for 
disciplinary action by the Institute. However, when such conduct constitutes a threat to person or property within 
the Rensselaer community or under other circumstances, it will result in disciplinary review and/or action. 
Rensselaer assumes the responsibility to regulate the private conduct of its students when such conduct could 
constitute a hazard to or an infringement on the rights of others, a violation of the law, or a disruption of the 
legitimate academic and administrative processes of the Institute. 
Student organizations sanctioned or recognized by the Institute are subject to the same regulations as individual 
students. Institute recognition means that such groups accept corporate responsibility to protect members of the 
Rensselaer community and their guests from any violation of their rights in group activities and in activities of 
individual members. Such organizations are generally required to designate officers, but such action in no way 
diminishes the group's corporate responsibility. Failure of the officers, when acting in their official capacity, to 
responably protect the rights of members of the community and to uphold policy shall be considered behavior 
also subject to individual disciplinary action. 
Rensselaer accepts its responsibility to protect the members of the community against any infringement of their 
rights by exercising its discretion to subject to disciplinary action any student who violates the rights of others. 
Authority for the administration of student disciplinary and judicial processes at Rensselaer is vested exclusively 
in the Dean of Students Office, by delegation from the President. 
These policies are based first on the recognition that institutional existence is a privilege granted by public trust, 
subject to the sanctions and responsibilities defined by the society of which the Institute is a part. Second, society 
generally provides legal canons, ethical mores, and conduct expectancies pertaining to individual and group 
behavior, and these are a fact to which the Institute cannot be indifferent. 
GROUNDS FOR DISCIPLINARY ACTION 
A violation of the Grounds for Disciplinary Action may be construed to include: (a) active violation; (b) attempt to 
violate; and (c) solicitation of or aiding another in the commission of a violation. Disciplinary action may be 
instituted in any case in which an individual or group of students is found in violation of any of the following 
regulations: 
Page 8 
Rensselaer Handbook of Student Rights and Responsibilities, rev. January 6, 2025 
1. 
Conduct which could be construed to be a violation of any federal, state, or local law. 
2. 
3. 
4. 
5. 
6. 
7. 
8. 
9. 
Conduct which disrupts or interferes with the personal or group rights of other members of the 
Institute community or with any activities of the Institute including, but not limited to, access to 
facilities and performance of normal duties. 
Conduct which violates personal, group, or Institute rights to be secure against unlawful intrusion or 
seizure including, but not limited to: (a) theft or possession of stolen property; (b) possession or use of 
unauthorized Institute keys or access devices; (c) unauthorized entry; and (d) refusal to leave or to 
release any property when ordered to do so by any person having jurisdiction over it. 
Damage to property including, but not limited to, vandalism. 
Academic dishonesty, as defined in this document. 
Fraud, including, but not limited to, forgery, misuse, and/or alteration of Institute records, 
documents, or identification. 
Use, possession, or distribution of controlled substances (illegal drugs, as defined by state and federal 
law) and precursors of controlled substances or drug paraphernalia, except as expressly permitted by 
state and federal law and Institute regulations. 
Being in any place for the purpose of unlawful use, possession, or distribution of a controlled substance. 
Disorderly, lewd, harassing, or indecent conduct. 
10. Physical assault, or conduct that threatens, encourages, or causes physical harm to persons or property. 
11. Hazing, as defined in this document or by New York State. 
12. Willful failure or refusal to testify as a witness after having been directed to appear at an Institute 
investigation or disciplinary proceeding, unless the testimony would tend to implicate said student in a 
violation of Institute regulations, or where the procedures governing the investigation or proceeding 
expressly grant a right of non-participation; or knowingly providing false testimony or evidence at an 
Institute disciplinary proceeding. An Institute disciplinary proceeding includes, but is not limited to, 
formal or informal action by the offices of the Dean of Students, the Vice Provost and Dean of 
Graduate Education or the Vice Provost and Dean of Undergraduate Education, hearings before any 
Judicial Hearing Board described in this Handbook or in Institute policies such as the Sexual 
Misconduct Policy, and procedures adopted by the Trustees in connection with the Rules for 
Maintenance of Public Order. 
13. Conduct which endangers the safety of the Institute community, including, but not limited to, tampering 
with fire-warning devices, fire protection systems, portable fire extinguishers and other fire safety 
equipment; setting a fire on Institute property; use of cooking equipment in unauthorized areas of the 
residence halls; reckless operation of a motor vehicle. 
14. Use, possession, or storage of dangerous weapons, chemicals, explosive devices, or materials 
including, but not limited to, firearms, air guns, prohibited knives (such as switch knives, swords, 
daggers, gravity knives, throwing stars, and knives with blades more than three inches long), 
ammunition, slingshots, metallic knuckles, bows and arrows, fireworks, and bombs. 
15. Failure to comply with an Institute official in the performance of their duties, including, but not 
limited to, failure to provide valid identification or knowingly furnishing false information. 
16. Failure to honor financial obligations to the Institute or to any element thereof. 
17. Conduct which violates Institute or student government regulations established in a specific area or 
department by those having jurisdiction over it including, but not limited to: Parking, Public Safety, 
Residence Life, Financial Aid, Health Services, the Folsom Library, Computing and Information 
Services, and the Rensselaer Union. 
18. Discriminatory Harassment and Behavior – Engaging in conduct (oral, written, graphic, or physical) that 
may harm, threaten, harass, demean, intimidate, or create a hostile environment for, any individual, or 
group of individuals, based upon that individual or group’s identity or category protected under 
Rensselaer’s policy on Non-Discrimination/Harassment Prevention/Equal Opportunity. 
Page 9 
Rensselaer Handbook of Student Rights and Responsibilities, rev. January 6, 2025 
PLEASE NOTE: Disciplinary Actions and Appeals of a violation of the Sexual Misconduct Policy are 
determined in accordance with said Sexual Misconduct Policy, not through the Student Judicial System. 
JURISDICTION WITHIN THE RENSSELAER STUDENT JUDICIAL SYSTEM 
Jurisdiction is, by definition, the right, authority, and power to hear and adjudicate the controversy that people 
seek to bring before a hearing officer or board. 
The jurisdiction of the Rensselaer Judicial System includes on-campus events and behavior as well as certain 
off-campus events, gatherings and behavior. Hearing officers and boards within the system shall have the 
authority to hear and decide any case which is "Institute-related." 
To be "Institute-related" a matter must involve: (I) a violation of the Grounds for Disciplinary Action (GDA) by a 
Rensselaer student or student group, with said violation occurring on campus; or (II) a violation of the GDA by a 
Rensselaer student or student group, with said violation occurring off-campus under one or more of the following 
conditions: 
1. 
2. 
3. 
4. 
The victim is a student or Rensselaer-affiliated individual or group, including the Institute itself (the status 
of the victim need not have been known by the perpetrator in the commission of the offense). 
The alleged violator has used their status as a student or Rensselaer group to facilitate the commission 
of the offense. 
The violation is committed during a Rensselaer-sponsored or sanctioned event, or an event organized or 
sponsored by a student organization. 
The violation is a serious infraction that is likely to cause severe damage to the reputation of Rensselaer 
or the Rensselaer community; threatens the health or safety of the Rensselaer community; or relates to 
conduct which may be construed to constitute a danger to the security, health or safety of members of 
the Rensselaer community, person or property (Examples include, but are not limited to, malicious 
conduct resulting in egregious harm to others, conduct that may be construed as a health or safety 
danger to members of the Rensselaer community, acts of violence affecting the public's safety and 
welfare, or possession, sale, and/or distribution of illegal drugs or weapons). 
The Rensselaer Judicial System is comprised of the Dean of Students Office (including Student Living and 
Learning hearing officers), hearing/appeal boards, Student Judicial Advisers, and the Provost. The object is to 
settle issues as informally as possible but to ensure fairness to all parties. Disciplinary cases are heard first in 
the Dean of Students Office, and civil cases (including student government disputes) are heard first by the 
Judicial Board. The standard of proof in Rensselaer's judicial system is a preponderance of the evidence. 
COMPONENTS OF THE JUDICIAL SYSTEM 
DEAN OF STUDENTS OFFICE 
The Dean of Students Office shall have initial jurisdiction in alleged violations of the Grounds for Disciplinary 
Action and of the Statement of Relationship between Rensselaer Social Fraternities and Sororities. The Dean of 
Students Office will issue determinations of responsibility and assign sanctions, either of which may be appealed 
to the appropriate board. All decisions of boards are recommended to the Dean of Students Office for 
implementation or, in civil cases, to communicate the outcome to the parties involved. 
JUDICIAL INQUIRY 
A judicial inquiry is initiated when the Dean of Students Office is made aware that a student or group may be 
involved in, or have been witness to, a violation of the Grounds for Disciplinary Action. A student is required to 
be present at said inquiry when requested by the Dean of Students Office or designee. Failure to comply with 
this request may result in a hold being placed on a student's records, grades, transcripts, registration, and 
Page 10 
Rensselaer Handbook of Student Rights and Responsibilities, rev. January 6, 2025 
degree, and the inquiry being conducted in the student's absence. 
If a student is requested to be present at a judicial inquiry, the student will be informed of the nature of the 
concern, of the option to consult a Student Judicial Adviser before speaking to the hearing officer, and will be 
reminded to review the judicial process. The student is responsible to answer fully and truthfully all questions. 
Failure to do so may be considered a violation of the Grounds for Disciplinary Action (knowingly providing false 
testimony or evidence). The student has the right to refuse to answer specific questions only if the student's 
responses would tend to incriminate them in a violation of the Grounds for Disciplinary Action. The student 
must, however, state reasons for refusing to answer. The student may have a Student Judicial Adviser present 
at a judicial inquiry only with expressed permission of the hearing officer. 
The judicial inquiry may not necessarily result in disciplinary action but is part of the fact-finding phase of the 
judicial process. The student will be asked questions about the incident. Other persons may be present only 
rarely and at the hearing officer's sole discretion. The hearing officer may choose to adjourn the inquiry at any 
time in order to obtain further information from other sources. 
Note: A student may view judicial documents used as evidence against them if requested. However, names 
other than that of the individual student should first be redacted to protect the confidentiality of any others named 
in the requested document(s). Students do not have access to internal communications, hearing officer notes, 
Dean's notes, or confidential memoranda. 
Following this fact-finding phase, the hearing officer decides whether disciplinary action is necessary and may then 
either adjourn the inquiry or make a determination of responsibility and assign a sanction at the conclusion of the 
Judicial Inquiry. A letter of notification of decision, and if appropriate, the sanction(s), will be issued to the student. In 
addition, at the sole discretion of the Dean of Students Office, and to the extent applicable law permits, a copy of the 
letter may be sent to the student's parent(s) or guardian(s). 
If the student accepts the finding of responsibility and sanction(s), the case is considered resolved and may not be 
appealed.  
JUDICIAL BOARD HEARINGS 
If the student does not accept the finding of responsibility and sanction(s), the student may request a hearing before 
the Judicial Board. Such request must be sent in writing to the Board Chairperson via the Senior Judicial 
Administrator in the Dean of Students Office within three (3) Institute business days of receiving the hearing officer's 
decision. 
In the event a timely request for hearing before the Judicial Board is received, the sanction(s) determined at the 
time of the Judicial Inquiry will be deferred until the conclusion of the Judicial Board hearing and decision. The 
decision of responsibility and applicable sanction(s) determined by the Judicial Board hearing will override the 
judicial inquiry decision and take immediate effect. 
APPEALS 
The finding issued and sanction(s) assigned within the Student Judicial System may be appealed as defined below. 
A student may request an appeal to the appropriate appeal-level judicial body through the hearing officer or Senior 
Judicial Administrator. Appeal requests must be submitted in writing from the appellant specifically, within the time 
limit designated; must include the specific reasons/rationale and supporting information for requesting an appeal.  
and can be only for the reasons/grounds stated subsequently. Upon receipt of the appeal request, the appropriate 
appeal-level judicial body will proceed accordingly.  
If an appeal request is not submitted according to the above requirements and by the date and time designated, or 
Page 11 
Rensselaer Handbook of Student Rights and Responsibilities, rev. January 6, 2025 
not accepted by the appeal-level board, the previous decision stands as final and the matter cannot be further 
appealed. 
GROUNDS FOR APPEAL 
Grounds for appeal include only: demonstrated procedural error; new evidence that could not have been discovered 
by the accused student prior to the time of the original decision which would be likely to change these results of the 
previous outcome (“material new evidence”); and/or sanctions that are not appropriate for the violations.   
The Judicial Board is not considered an appeal-level board. A hearing request to the Judicial Board is not 
considered an “appeal,” and shall be provided as of right to a party who makes an appropriate and timely request for 
such hearing. For purposes of clarity, a student who does not accept the initial judicial inquiry decision may not 
bypass the Judicial Board hearing process and proceed directly to an appeal; rather, the student must first proceed 
through the Judicial Board hearing process.  
Note: A mandatory minimum sanction cannot be reduced or appealed, other than for mitigation purposes 
relating to organizations as specified in the Good Samaritan Policy. 
JUDICIAL HEARING BOARDS 
There are several hearing boards that will hear and/or review the decision of the Dean of Students Office or other 
Institute action. In certain instances, these boards may hear a case without a judicial inquiry; these are: 
• Civil cases between students or student groups, including all student government disputes. 
• Cases referred directly to a hearing board by the Dean of Students Office. However, such a referral would 
only be due to rare and/or extenuating circumstances. 
• Cases not initiated in the Dean of Students Office, such as Faculty Academic Board cases 
and the academic grading portion of academic dishonesty cases. 
• Cases involving appeals of parking tickets issued by Rensselaer’s Office of Auxiliary 
Services. 
Hearing boards will hear cases depending upon their nature and may issue determinations of responsibility and 
assign sanctions. Both parties involved have the option to accept the decision of the hearing board or, where an 
appeal is allowed, appeal to the Review Board. If both parties accept the board's decision, it stands as final. 
Hearing boards are governed by their own bylaws. To request a hearing of one of these boards you must provide a 
written request, per the previous specifications, within three (3) Institute business days of notification of the prior 
judicial decision. 
JUDICIAL BOARD 
The Judicial Board has jurisdiction in alleged violations of the Grounds for Disciplinary Action by students or 
groups except where other Institute policies or procedures grant jurisdiction to other panels (e.g., Sexual 
Misconduct Policy), and in civil cases between students/groups. The Judicial Board is comprised of seven 
students. Further responsibilities of the Judicial Board may be defined in the Rensselaer Union Constitution. 
FACULTY ACADEMIC BOARD 
The Faculty Academic Board shall hear the appeals of final course grades, but only after a student has been 
unsuccessful in resolving this dispute with their professor, the Department Chair, and the Dean of the School, 
and when the student alleges the wrongful assigning of a grade. This allegation must be based upon a violation 
of the course syllabus, a violation of Institute policy by the professor/ instructor, or a violation of the student's 
rights under the Student Bill of Rights. The Faculty Academic Board is comprised of three faculty members 
Page 12 
Rensselaer Handbook of Student Rights and Responsibilities, rev. January 6, 2025 
appointed by the Provost. A decision issued by the Faculty Academic Board is final and not subject to further 
appeal by either party. 
THE JOINT BOARD 
The Joint Board has civil jurisdiction over alleged violations of Institute rules, rights, or regulations by an academic 
unit, an administrative unit, or by Rensselaer itself when the complainant is a student or a student group. The 
Joint Board will not hear a matter unless genuine, demonstrable attempts to resolve it with the unit and its 
supervisor have been unsuccessful. The Joint Board's decision may then be appealed directly to the Provost 
by either party within five (5) Institute business days of receiving the Joint Board decision. The Joint Board 
consists of three Judicial Board members, three faculty members, and one administrator. The Judicial Board 
Chairperson also chairs the Joint Board. 
REVIEW BOARD 
The decision of a lower board (other than the Faculty Academic Board) may be appealed to the Review Board, by 
either party. The written appeal must be sent to the Review Board Chairperson via the Senior Judicial Administrator 
in the Dean of Students Office, within five (5) Institute business days of receiving the lower board's decision. The 
Review Board will then meet to discuss the merits of the appeal. Based solely upon the written evidence before it 
(including the letter of appeal and any material new evidence presented) the Review Board will decide one of the 
following: to uphold the decision of the lower body; to modify the verdict or sanction(s) of the lower body; to refer the 
case back to the lower body with instructions for further action; or to conduct a hearing. If the Review Board decides 
to conduct a hearing, it will determine what information will be examined or further clarified. The Review Board is an 
appeals board and only reviews lower board decisions. The Review Board consists of two students, two faculty 
members, and one staff administrator. Additional information about the Review Board, including the appointment 
process for members, can be found in the Review Board Bylaws.  
THE PROVOST 
The decisions of the Review Board and the Joint Board may be subject to final determination by the Provost of the 
Institute, at the written request of either party involved, within five (5) Institute business days of notification of the 
board's decision. Appeals of Review Board decisions are made by either party via the Senior Judicial Administrator 
in the Dean of Students Office. Appeals of Joint Board decisions are made by either party directly to the Provost. 
The Provost is unconstrained in the procedure to employ in the context of such a review including making a 
determination based solely on the written evidence (including the letter of appeal). 
DEVIATION FROM PROCEDURES 
Deviation from the above listed procedures will not invalidate a decision or proceeding unless it causes significant 
prejudice to the accused student, which the student must bring to the attention of the applicable panel, 
committee, or board immediately upon belief that such prejudice occurred. 
In determining whether a deviation caused significant prejudice, the applicable panel, committee, or board shall 
consider whether the course of the proceedings would have been substantially different had the deviation not 
occurred. 
The applicable panel, committee, or board also shall determine whether the accused student gave adequate 
notice of the alleged procedural event. 
STUDENT JUDICIAL ADVISERS 
Student Judicial Advisers exist under the provisions of the judicial system which allow students to be advised 
with respect to Rensselaer judicial proceedings. Student Judicial Advisers advise students of the policies and 
procedures, as well as their rights and responsibilities within the judicial system. Advisers do not, however, 
investigate, prepare, or present/argue judicial cases. 
A student may request a Judicial Adviser at the time of the inquiry, or three days before the "final" inquiry.  
Page 13 
Rensselaer Handbook of Student Rights and Responsibilities, rev. January 6, 2025 
LEGAL COUNSEL 
Requests for an attorney to be present to advise an accused student will be considered only in instances where 
the student has been arrested or has had a criminal complaint filed against them. If it is determined that a 
student will be permitted to have an attorney present, the student must notify the Senior Judicial Administrator, 
in writing, a minimum of 72 hours in advance of the hearing, indicating the name, business address, and phone 
number of the attorney who will be in attendance. 
The role of an attorney is limited in the judicial process. The attorney may be present only to advise the accused 
student and can confer with the student during the judicial proceeding. However, the attorney is not entitled to 
address the hearing officer or board and may not communicate specific questions, responses, or statements for 
the student. Moreover, all correspondence regarding the judicial matter, including the filing of an appeal, must 
come directly from the student(s) involved. Institute officials involved in the judicial system may elect to discuss 
procedural matters with attorneys. However, as a general practice, communication and inquiries from attorneys 
will be referred directly to Institute Legal Counsel. 
TYPES OF DISCIPLINARY ACTION 
Disciplinary action includes, but is not limited to: 
Disciplinary Warning 
Issued to students in writing to indicate that their behavior is in violation of Institute regulations and that 
repetition may bring more serious consequences. 
Disciplinary Probation 
A formal warning period which indicates to a student that further policy violations may result in more serious 
consequences including suspension or expulsion. 
Removal from Residence Facilities 
The student's room rental agreement is void and they are required to vacate Rensselaer residence facilities 
permanently or for a specified period of time. 
Disciplinary Suspension 
The student is separated from Rensselaer for a specific period of time and is required to leave the Institute. 
Return to campus, by a student on disciplinary suspension, may occur only with prior notification and approval 
of the Dean of Students Office. The student may submit an application for return at the end of the specified 
suspension time. Return to Rensselaer is at the sole and absolute discretion of Rensselaer and a student may be 
required to fulfill specific conditions prior to and following their return. 
Expulsion 
The student is permanently separated from the Institute without opportunity for readmission at any time. The 
student is required to leave the Institute within the time determined and cannot be in or on Institute property 
without the prior notification and approval of the Dean of Students Office. 
Fines 
Separate from reimbursement or restitution, monetary fines may also be levied. 
Alternative Action 
Alternative action may be required as part of a sanction and includes, but is not limited to: educational 
programming and training, counseling, assessment, restriction or loss of privileges, restitution, apology, and 
community service. This service will be unpaid and benefit a charitable or non-profit organization including 
Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute. 
Group Disciplinary Action 
Institute-recognized, sponsored, or sanctioned student groups are subject to the same disciplinary action as 
Page 14 
Rensselaer Handbook of Student Rights and Responsibilities, rev. January 6, 2025 
individual students and may also have the following or other penalties applied: limitation of social and other 
organization privileges or programs; alternative action, removal, or limitation of funding; and suspension or 
expulsion. If membership within the group is an element in the violations of the Grounds for Disciplinary Action, 
the penalty may also include a limitation on membership. 
Group Suspension 
The suspension of a student organization denotes the revocation of Institute recognition for a designated period 
of time and includes, but is not limited to: the loss of Institute recognition and all privileges thereof, including 
exclusion from all Institute programs and services, student government, funding, advertising the organization 
and/or displaying the organization name or house letters; the inability to participate in or sponsor any activities 
as an organization, to participate in recruitment and pledging activities; or for organization members to hold 
positions related to their membership in the suspended organization (i.e. IFC, MSFC, or Panhellenic positions, 
applicable student government positions). These conditions are in effect for the duration of the suspension. 
At the end of the designated suspension period, an organization will be eligible for consideration of reinstatement 
if all conditions have been met. Conditions for reinstatement include a probationary period for a minimum of one 
semester following a suspension, but are not limited to, educational programming/training, restrictions on alcohol, 
and hiring a Rensselaer approved advisor to live in residence. 
Any organization, which violates its sanctions and/or conditions of suspension, is subject to the permanent loss 
of Institute recognition. 
Group Expulsion 
The expulsion of a student organization denotes the permanent revocation of Institute recognition and all 
privileges thereof, without the opportunity for reinstatement at any time. An organization that is expelled is 
permanently excluded from all Institute programs and services including, but not limited to: student government, 
funding, advertising the organization and/or displaying the organization name or house letters; the inability to 
participate in or sponsor any activities as an organization, to participate in recruitment and pledging activities; or 
for organization members to hold positions related to their membership in the suspended organization (i.e., IFC, 
MSFC, or Panhellenic positions, applicable student government positions). 
DISCLOSURE OF DISCIPLINARY ACTION 
Note: Any disciplinary action can be disclosed to federal, state, or local government entity, law enforcement, 
licensing or certification board, or corporate entity upon request of said agency if and only if: (a) by subpoena or 
binding order of a court or government agency, (b) a student signs a confidentiality waiver for said agency or 
government entity, or (c) such disclosure is otherwise in compliance with state and federal laws, including the 
Family Educational Rights and Privacy Act of 1974 (FERPA). 
POLICY ON TRANSCRIPT NOTATION 
It is the policy of Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute that students who are found in violation of the Sexual 
Misconduct Policy or rules of conduct set forth in this Handbook or other policies of Rensselaer and receive the 
sanction of ‘Expulsion’ or ‘Suspension’ will have a notation on their official transcript of Rensselaer. 
A student who is found responsible for a violation of the Sexual Misconduct Policy, or rules of conduct set forth 
in this Handbook or other policies of Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute, withdraws from the Institute before the 
implementation of a sanction of Expulsion of Suspension, while such conduct charges are pending, and declines 
to complete the disciplinary process, will have a notation on their official transcript of Rensselaer. 
Transcript notations for expulsion shall not be removed from a student’s transcript, unless such expulsion is 
vacated for any reason. Transcript notations for suspension may be removed after one year after conclusion of 
Page 15 
Rensselaer Handbook of Student Rights and Responsibilities, rev. January 6, 2025 
the suspension by the student submitting an appeal to the Vice Provost of Student Experience requesting 
removal of such notation. The decision of the Vice Provost of Student Experience is final and not subject to 
appeal. Requests for removal of transcript notations for suspension may be submitted annually thereafter or 
until the student graduates, whichever is greater. Notations regarding suspensions will also be removed if such 
suspension is vacated for any reason. 
NOTIFICATION 
Upon final disposition of a case, the Dean of Students Office has the option, but not the obligation, to submit an 
anonymous description of the disciplinary situation, with sanctions assigned, to Union-affiliated and Union
recognized student newspapers for publication. 
TEMPORARY ACTIONS 
Records Hold 
Pending resolution of a disciplinary matter, at the discretion of the Dean of Students Office, a student's records, 
grades, transcript, registration, or awarding of a degree may be withheld. This action may also occur if a period 
of probation or suspension is imposed or if a student fails to comply with the sanctions imposed. 
Suspension of the Judicial Process 
Rensselaer reserves the right to suspend the Institute judicial process during breaks, recesses, and the months 
between the spring and fall semesters, when boards are not in session. Additionally, depending on the 
circumstances, alleged policy violations that occur toward the end of each semester may not be heard until the 
following semester is in session. 
Page 16 
Rensselaer Handbook of Student Rights and Responsibilities, rev. January 6, 2025 
ADDITIONAL POLICIES 
COMMUNITY HEALTH EMERGENCIES STATEMENT 
The health and safety of students and other persons on the Rensselaer campus are of paramount importance. 
During periods of community health emergencies, Rensselaer may implement requirements and restrictions 
designed to enhance the safety of the Rensselaer community during crises. Requirements may include, but 
are not limited to, mandatory testing and immunization, social distancing and use of personal protective 
equipment (PPE), reporting for tracking and tracing purposes, reduction of on-campus activities and visitors, 
restrictions on events and gatherings, self-quarantine or isolation directives, and de-densification standards, 
including but not limited to, limitations on the number of people who may gather at any given time. 
Responsibility for compliance with these requirements rests with all students attending the Rensselaer campus 
or living on or near the campus, as well as to any gathering, events or locations where members of the 
Rensselaer community attend. Because compliance with health and safety requirements are a critical 
condition for on-campus attendance and participation in academic and other Rensselaer activities during a 
community health emergency, students who fail to comply may be required, as a non-disciplinary action, to 
immediately leave campus and resume coursework online, following consultation with a student’s relevant 
administrator or advisor; and activities of student organizations may be immediately suspended. Repeated, 
intentional, or egregious non-compliance shall be considered Grounds for Disciplinary Action (GDA) violation 
of which may result in discipline including, but not limited to, suspension or expulsion of the individual students 
and/or the student organization. The requirements are subject to immediate change based on the 
circumstances and nature of the emergency (including but not limited to, the full or partial closure of the 
Institute, implementation of a mandatory quarantine, required testing, etc.). Details will be communicated to 
the Rensselaer community in a timely way, and in advance whenever possible. 
ACADEMIC INTEGRITY 
Intellectual integrity and credibility are the foundation of all academic work. A violation of Academic 
Integrity policy is, by definition, considered a flagrant offense to the educational process. It is taken seriously by 
students, faculty, and Rensselaer and will be addressed in an effective manner. 
If found responsible for committing academic dishonesty, a student may be subject to one or both types of 
penalties: an academic (grade) penalty administered by the professor and/or disciplinary action through the 
Rensselaer judicial process described in this handbook. 
Academic dishonesty is a violation of the Grounds for Disciplinary Action as described in this handbook. A student 
may be subject to any of the following types of disciplinary action should disciplinary action be pursued by the 
instructor: disciplinary warning; disciplinary probation; disciplinary suspension, expulsion and/or alternative 
actions as agreed on by the student and hearing officer. It should be noted that no student who allegedly commits 
academic dishonesty will be able to drop or change the grade option for the course in question and is not eligible 
to request an F examination for the course. 
The definitions and examples presented below are a sampling of types of academic dishonesty and are not to 
be construed as an exhaustive or exclusive list. The academic integrity policy applies to all students, 
undergraduate and graduate, and to scholarly pursuits and research. Additionally, attempts to commit academic 
dishonesty or to assist in the commission or attempt of such an act are also violations of this policy. 
Academic Fraud 
Academic Fraud is defined as the alteration of documentation relating to the grading process; for example, 
changing exam solutions to negotiate for a higher grade or tampering with an instructor's grade book. 
Collaboration 
Page 17 
Rensselaer Handbook of Student Rights and Responsibilities, rev. January 6, 2025 
Collaboration is defined as deliberately facilitating an act of academic dishonesty in any way or form; for example, 
allowing another student to observe an exam paper or allowing another student to "recycle" one's old term paper 
or using one another's work in a paper or lab report without citing it as another's work. 
Copying 
Copying is defined as obtaining information pertaining to a graded exercise by deliberately observing the paper 
of another student; for example, noting which alternative a neighboring student has circled on a multiple-choice 
exam. 
Cribbing 
Cribbing is defined as the use or attempted use of prohibited materials, information, or study aids in an academic 
exercise. Examples include using an unauthorized formal sheet during an exam. 
Fabrication 
Fabrication is defined as the unauthorized falsification or invention of any information in an academic exercise. 
Examples include the use of "bought" or "ready-made" term papers, or falsifying lab records or reports. 
Plagiarism 
Plagiarism is defined as representing the work or words of another as one's own through the omission of 
acknowledgment or reference. Examples include using sentences verbatim from a published source in a term 
paper without appropriate referencing, or presenting as one's own the detailed argument of a published source, 
or presenting as one's own electronically or digitally enhanced graphic representations from any form of media. 
Sabotage 
Sabotage is defined as the destruction of another student's work. Examples include destroying a model, lab 
experiment, computer program, or term paper developed by another student. 
Substitution 
Substitution is defined as utilizing a proxy, or acting as a proxy, in any academic exercise. Examples include 
taking an exam for another student or having a homework assignment done by someone else. 
FACULTY PROCEDURES FOR RESPONDING TO ACADEMIC DISHONESTY 
“If there is a reason to believe a student in a course may have been involved in academic dishonesty, then 
contact the student(s) and schedule a meeting to discuss the allegations. This meeting should occur within ten 
(10) Institute business days of having discovered the possible dishonesty. 
When meeting with the student, review the circumstances and evidence related to the suspicion of academic 
dishonesty and allow the student the opportunity to provide their perspective on the situation. Take notes 
during the meeting to document important information. After reviewing the situation, including speaking with 
others who might be involved or have knowledge of the situation, make a determination as to the nature and 
extent of the violation, if any, by the accused student. If it is concluded that a student has violated the Institute 
academic dishonesty policy, it is the faculty member's responsibility to determine the academic (grade) penalty 
(i.e., failure of the course, significant reduction of the final grade, etc.) and to communicate this decision to the 
student in writing. This communication should occur within five (5) Institute business days of having met with the 
student. Included in this written notification should be information regarding the student's option to appeal the 
grade decision and of the procedure/time limit in which to do so. 
Faculty who choose to apply an academic sanction to a student found responsible for committing academic 
dishonesty must complete the Academic Integrity Violation Case Summary and Report Form. Documentation 
should be submitted with the report that includes exams/assignments involving cheating, crib sheets, witness 
statements, or other materials deemed relevant to the case. The incident of academic dishonesty will be kept on 
file in the Dean of Students Office as a record of the incident and a way to track repeat/multiple offenses by the 
same student(s). 
Page 18 
Rensselaer Handbook of Student Rights and Responsibilities, rev. January 6, 2025 
In addition to the academic penalty, the faculty member can request that judicial action be taken against a student 
for violating Grounds for Disciplinary Action, specifically academic dishonesty. Such requests should be made 
in writing to the Senior Judicial Administrator or Dean of Students. The documentation will be reviewed, assigned 
to a hearing officer, and proceed in accordance with Institute protocol." 
APPEAL PROCESS FOR ACADEMIC PENALTY FOR ACADEMIC DISHONESTY 
Decisions regarding grades are initially the responsibility and jurisdiction of the course professor, and the school 
in which the academic dishonesty occurred, as there is no one in a better position to make this determination. 
Any appeal of a grade or academic penalty for academic dishonesty falls under the same authority. Therefore, 
a student can submit a written appeal of an academic penalty to the Department Chair within five (5) Institute 
business days of being notified of the faculty member's decision. If the course professor is the Department Chair 
or Dean of the school or there are other circumstances that could create the perception of bias, steps must be 
taken to use other appropriate individuals for the appeal process. 
The Department Chair (or designee) will then make a determination based on the facts/circumstances of the 
case and the appropriateness of the original sanction. This determination should be made and communicated to 
the student and the professor within ten (10) Institute business days of receiving the appeal. Included in this 
written notification should be information regarding the student's option to appeal the grade decision and of the 
procedure/time limit in which to do so. 
If the student or professor believes they have grounds for appealing the decision of the Department Chair (e.g., 
new evidence), both parties have the option to submit a written appeal to the Dean of the School within five (5) 
business days of receiving the decision. The Dean will then render a decision based on the 
facts/circumstances of the case and the appropriateness of the sanction. This determination should be made 
and communicated to the student and the professor within ten (10) Institute business days of receiving the 
appeal. 
The decision of the Dean of the School may be subject to final determination by the Provost (or designee), with 
good cause and at the written request of either party involved, within five (5) Institute business days of notification 
of the Dean of the School's decision. The Provost is unconstrained in the procedure they choose to employ in the 
context of such a review. The Provost is the final level of appeal and their decision stands as final for both the 
student(s) and professor involved. The Provost will render a decision based on the circumstances of the case 
and the appropriateness of the sanction. This determination should be made and communicated to the student 
and the professor within ten (10) Institute business days of receiving the appeal. 
Students found in violation of the academic integrity policy are prohibited from dropping a course in order to 
avoid the academic penalty. 
PREVENTION OF ACADEMIC DISHONESTY 
For those courses or academic exercises in which either the instructor or student considers proper definition of 
academic dishonesty to be open to interpretation, the instructor is expected to outline theirparticular standards. 
An example for which such definition seems particularly necessary would be collaboration on out-of- class 
assignments. 
Course supervisors are expected to provide adequate and conscientious proctoring for exams. Faculty and 
proctors may ask a student for identification during an exam or exercise, and take reasonable precautions to 
lessen probability of academic dishonesty occurring, such as requiring that all personal belongings, texts, etc., 
be placed away from desks in the exam room. 
Page 19 
Rensselaer Handbook of Student Rights and Responsibilities, rev. January 6, 2025 
NON-DISCRIMINATION/HARASSMENT PREVENTION/EQUAL OPPORTUNITY POLICY 
Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute complies with all federal, state, and local non-discrimination laws and is 
committed to providing a working, living, and learning environment free from discrimination and harassment 
based on race, color, religion, sex, pregnancy, sexual orientation, gender identity, gender expression, age, 
marital status, national origin, citizenship status, disability, military status, veteran status, genetic information, 
genetic predisposition, domestic violence victim status, or any other basis prohibited by law. 
Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute is also committed to providing equal opportunities for all persons regardless of 
race, color, religion, sex, pregnancy, sexual orientation, gender identity, gender expression, age, marital status, 
national origin, citizenship status, disability, military status, veteran status, genetic information, genetic 
predisposition, domestic violence victim status, or any other basis prohibited by law. Equal opportunity extends 
to all aspects of the academic and student life relationship. 
STUDENT POLICY ON ACTS OF BIAS, DISCRIMINATORY BEHAVIOR, AND HARASSMENT 
Diversity is best understood as a quantity of people that represent various colors, cultures and creeds within a 
single community. Inclusion would be the quality of life that is provided for people of various backgrounds to live, 
learn and work together harmoniously within a single community. Here at Rensselaer, we know that gifted and 
accomplished people are the lifeblood of the best universities. Rensselaer draws bright and talented students; it 
behooves us to ensure our campus community is one that provides a higher quality living, learning and working 
environment which strives for equity, access and inclusion for these bright and talented students to be successful 
and achieve academic, professional and personal excellence. This is our vision for all who are part of the 
Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute community, however, in order to reach this goal, we must be proactive and identify 
and implement strategies and systems to address bias acts on campus which only serve to stifle and harm our 
community. The Bias Assessment and Response Team refers reports of bias incidents to campus partners who 
have the authority to review and investigate these incidents in order to create a collaborative resolution for these 
pressing matters. 
Acts of bias can be perpetrated either physically, verbally, through various forms of media and/or other actions. 
Bias Acts and Discriminatory Behavior 
Acts of bias and discriminatory behavior are prohibited on campus, in Rensselaer-related activities, and within our 
Rensselaer community. Such incidents include but are not limited to acts of racism, colorism, sexism, and ableism. 
These acts are often disruptive to the community and harmful to individuals or groups of people. Incidents that may 
violate Institute policy will be reviewed and responded to by the appropriate designees as referred to earlier in the 
introduction of this policy. In addition, incidents that may be a violation of civil or criminal law may be reported and 
responded to by law enforcement authorities. Incidents that are not in violation of law or Institute policy, but may 
affect other members of the Institute community, may warrant an informal and educational response through the 
Bias Assessment and Response Team. 
Rensselaer defines an incident of bias as an action(s) that may harm, harass, or threaten (including but not limited 
to acts that may cause physical injury, psychological pain or distress, emotional unrest, and discriminatory practices 
that directly or indirectly impact an individual’s ability to perform, etc.) and that one could reasonably and prudently 
conclude is motivated, in whole or in part, by the alleged offender’s bias against a person or group on the basis of 
an actual or perceived aspect of identity, including but not limited to: 
• Age 
• Race/Color 
• Ancestry/ Ethnicity 
• National Origin 
• Citizenship Status 
Page 20 
Rensselaer Handbook of Student Rights and Responsibilities, rev. January 6, 2025 
• Religion/Spirituality 
• Sex 
• Transgender Status 
• Gender Dysphoria, Identity or Expression 
• Sexual Orientation 
• Pregnancy 
• Disability 
• Marital or Civil Union 
• Domestic Partnership Status 
• Domestic Violence Victim Status 
• Familial Status 
• Relationship with or Association with Member(s) of a Protected Class 
• Genetic Information or Predisposition 
• Military or Veteran Status 
Marginalizing/Marginalized Identity: These terms are used to describe how certain classes or identities of people 
have been historically ostracized, oppressed and/or treated inequitably and unequally comparatively to the majority 
groups which often experience privilege based on their identity. 
Microaggressions 
Subtle, verbal and non-verbal insults, indignities and denigrating messages, directed toward an individual(s) due to 
their marginalized identities. Usually stated by well-intentioned people who are unaware of the hidden messages 
conveyed, the impact of their statements, and the unintentional connection to the institutional, interpersonal and 
internalized manifestations of bias. An act is more than a microaggression – and becomes an act of bias prohibited 
by Institute policy -- when the person committing the act does so with the intent to discriminate against, and/or is 
aware of the negative impact caused by their act or statement on, the individual(s) to whom it is directed. In 
determining whether reported acts of microaggressions or other incidents rise to the level where judicial action 
should be taken, Rensselaer will examine the totality of the circumstances surrounding the conduct, including its 
frequency, nature and severity, the relationship between the parties, and the context in which the conduct occurred. 
Should the reported conduct not rise to the level of requiring judicial action, BART will coordinate with the 
appropriate office to provide support resources and educational opportunities to address the reported concerns with 
the involved parties. 
Hate Crimes 
If you believe you have been a victim of a Hate Crime, or witness a Hate Crime, you should immediately dial 911 or 
contact Public Safety at 518-276-6611. Non-emergency reports should be made by calling the Department of 
Public Safety at 518-276-6656 or calling the Troy Police Department at 518-270-4411. 
Hate crimes are all crimes motivated by the perpetrator's bias or attitude against an individual or group based on 
perceived or actual personal characteristics, such as their race, religion, ethnicity, gender, sexual orientation, 
disability, etc. 
Hate crimes should be reported to Rensselaer’s Department of Public Safety and/or local law enforcement. Such 
reports of hate crimes will be addressed and responded to by law enforcement agencies through the criminal or 
civil legal system. Should the incident fall under Rensselaer’s jurisdiction, Rensselaer may address the involved 
student(s) role in the alleged incident by considering if a violation of Institute policy occurred, under the judicial 
inquiry process. This may occur parallel to law enforcement’s response. 
For more information on hate crimes, per New York State Law, please refer to 
https://www.nysenate.gov/legislation/laws/PEN/485.00    
Page 21 
Rensselaer Handbook of Student Rights and Responsibilities, rev. January 6, 2025 
Reporting and Response Process 
If you experienced or witnessed an incident of bias, we encourage you to use the Bias Incident Reporting Form in 
order for the institution to assess and respond to incidents of this nature. Acts of bias are perpetrated either 
physically, verbally, and/or through various forms of media (written). Reports may be submitted online through 
BART’s website: info.rpi.edu/BART or at the link above. 
Bias incident reports are routed to the Bias Assessment and Response Team (BART) and are referred to and 
reviewed by the appropriate responding office. If not anonymous, the reporter will receive an immediate and 
automatic confirmation of receipt from the online reporting tool via email upon submission. Within two institute 
business days, the Chair or a member of BART will respond to the reporter to re-confirm receipt of report and share 
additional details appropriate to the received report. Some reported incidents may require additional information 
and therefore the Chair for BART may contact the student reporter, if not anonymous. 
Investigations and resolving outcomes of reported incidents may take place within other offices such as the Dean of 
Students Office, Student Rights and Responsibilities, Human Resources, the Department of Public Safety and/or 
outside law enforcement agencies, if appropriate. Response protocols may differ in processes and timelines among 
the appropriate responding offices; such processes are separate from the purview of BART protocols, though the 
assistance and guidance of BART may continue to be engaged. BART will intervene accordingly once one of the 
aforementioned offices determines what level and type of response are appropriate. 
Reports submitted anonymously will not prevent Rensselaer from beginning the assessment and investigation 
phase, but the Institute's ability to fully investigate and resolve the report may be limited. 
BART will follow up with impacted parties, monitor the status of the response, and communicate with our campus 
community about reported incidents as appropriate (if the incident is not isolated and campus-wide notice serves to 
protect the campus community). BART will assist in providing campus partners preventative measures and aid, in 
collaboration with the Office of Multicultural Programs, in developing practices for increased diversity, equity and 
inclusion. 
Referral to Student Rights, Responsibilities and Judicial Affairs 
Reports involving alleged students are reviewed in partnership with the staff in the Dean of Students Office. Such 
reports referred for judicial review will follow processes consistent with those described under the Rensselaer 
Handbook for Student Rights and Responsibilities. If found responsible for a violation of the Student Policy on Bias 
Acts and Discriminatory Behavior, a range of sanctions may be imposed to address accountability and 
development of the involved student(s). These sanctions include but are not limited to, disciplinary statuses 
(disciplinary warning, probation, suspension, or expulsion), removal from campus or restricted access, and active 
educational sanctions, which requires the involved student(s) to engage in educational initiatives to further their 
learning and development as is consistent with the findings of the judicial inquiry. Active educational sanctions may 
include, attending a program or series of programs, reflective assignments, referrals to meet with BART members 
or other campus professionals, and/or coordination of other educational opportunities as deemed appropriate. 
Please note that if reports do not rise to the level of requiring judicial action does not mean that reports won’t be 
resolved through BART’s restorative process. The purpose for restorative practices is to emphasize healing and 
repair for all members impacted by an incident and education and perspective-changing is underscored for those 
who may have been alleged in an incident. 
Referral to the Division for Human Resources 
Reports or complaints which involve an employee or non-student third party (faculty, staff, vendors, contractors, or 
visitors) are referred to, investigated, and adjudicated by the Division for Human Resources. Reports investigated 
by the Division for Human Resources are responded to as consistent with the procedures described under the 
Rensselaer Faculty Handbook, the Rensselaer Employee Handbook and the Non-Discrimination/Equal 
Employment Opportunity Statement. 
Page 22 
Rensselaer Handbook of Student Rights and Responsibilities, rev. January 6, 2025 
Allegations and reports of discrimination based on disability may also need to be coordinated with the Division for 
Human Resources. 
Referral to Office of Title IX / Sexual Misconduct 
Title IX is a federal law prohibiting sex discrimination. The Title IX section of the Education Amendments Act of 1972 
states, “No person in the United States shall, on the basis of sex, be excluded from participation in, be denied the 
benefits of, or be subjected to discrimination under any education program or activity receiving Federal financial 
assistance.” Under Title IX, sexual misconduct is considered a form of sex discrimination. Sexual misconduct 
includes, but is not limited to: sexual harassment, sexual assault, dating and domestic violence, and stalking. Sexual 
misconduct is not tolerated at Rensselaer, and it is a violation of Institute policy, and state and federal law.  
Reports or complaints which involve sex discrimination or acts of sexual misconduct as defined above are referred 
to, investigated, and adjudicated by the institution’s Title IX Coordinators. Reports investigated by this unit are 
responded to as consistent with the procedures described under the Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute Sexual 
Misconduct Policy and Procedures. 
Students may file a report directly online with RPI here. This form can be submitted anonymously, or can include 
the reporter’s contact information. 
Contact and Support Resources 
BART Chairperson, Dean of Students Office  
Email: bart@rpi.edu                 
Phone: (518) 276-6266 
Assistant Dean for Underrepresented Students, Office for Student Success  
Email: Success@rpi.edu        
  Phone: (518) 276-8022 
Counseling Services  
Email: counseling@rpi.edu       
Title IX Coordinator         
Phone: (518) 276-6479 or (518) 276-6287 
Phone: (518) 276-6163 
https://sexualviolence.rpi.edu/reporting  
Disability Support Services  
Email: dss@rpi.edu                 
SEXUAL MISCONDUCT 
Phone: (518) 276-2231 
Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute is committed to maintaining a safe and healthy learning, living, and working 
environment in which no member of the Rensselaer community is, on the basis of sex, sexual orientation, gender 
identity or gender expression, excluded from participation in, denied the benefits of, or subjected to discrimination in 
any Institute program or activity. Prohibited sex discrimination includes sex-based harassment in the form of Sexual 
Misconduct, which encompasses dating violence, domestic violence, non-consensual sexual contact, sexual 
assault, sexual exploitation, and stalking, as defined by Title IX and under Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute Title IX 
and Sexual Misconduct Policy and Procedures.  Sexual Misconduct including but not limited to Sexual Harassment, 
Sexual Violence, Dating and Domestic Violence and Stalking, are forms of illegal discrimination in that they deny or 
limit an individual’s ability to participate in or benefit from the Institute’s programs or activities.  
In support of the overall goals of Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute, the purpose of Institute’s Title IX and Sexual 
Misconduct Policy and Procedures is to maintain a campus living, learning and working environment that supports 
the Institute’s educational mission, maintains respect and dignity for members of the Rensselaer community, and 
Page 23 
Rensselaer Handbook of Student Rights and Responsibilities, rev. January 6, 2025 
protects the rights of all members of the campus community. The Institute’s Title IX and Sexual Misconduct Policy 
and Procedures are intended to foster personal responsibility, high ethical values, individual accountability and 
civility toward others.  
Faculty, staff and students alleging sex-based discrimination, including acts of Sexual Misconduct, must follow 
the procedures and processes promulgated within the Institute’s Title IX and Sexual Misconduct Policy and 
Procedures. Allegations of Sexual Misconduct involving faculty, staff and students will be investigated and 
adjudicated as set forth in such policy.   
When such conduct involves students or employees from two or more educational institutions, such institutions 
may work collaboratively to address the conduct provided that such collaboration complies with the Family 
Educational Rights and Privacy Act. 
If you are a student of the Institute filing a report against an employee of the Institute or against a non-student 
third-party, any finding of a violation of Title IX, applicable state or federal law, or Institute policy will be 
administered in accordance with the Institute’s Title IX and Sexual Misconduct Policy and Procedures and 
Rensselaer Human Resources Policy Guidelines.  
If the report involves a faculty member, any finding of a violation of Title IX, applicable state or federal law, or 
Institute policy will be administered in accordance with the Institute’s Title IX and Sexual Misconduct Policy and 
Procedures and the Rensselaer Faculty Handbook.  
The Complaint procedures set forth in Institute’s Title IX and Sexual Misconduct Policy and Procedures are 
administrative in nature and are separate and distinct from the criminal and civil legal systems. The Institute 
encourages Complainants to pursue all remedies available to them, including reporting incidents of potential 
criminal conduct to law enforcement. If the conduct in question is alleged to be a violation of both Institute policy 
and the law, the Institute will proceed with its normal process, regardless of action or inaction by outside 
authorities. Decisions made or sanctions imposed through these or other Institute procedures are not subject to 
change because criminal or civil charges arising from the same conduct are dismissed, reduced, or rejected in 
favor of or against the Respondent.  
Sexual Misconduct Bill of Rights 
All students have the right to: 
1. 
2. 
3. 
4. 
5. 
6. 
7. 
8. 
9. 
Make a report to local law enforcement and/or state police; 
Have disclosures of domestic violence, dating violence, stalking, and sexual assault treated seriously; 
Make a decision about whether or not to disclose a crime or violation and participate in the judicial or 
conduct process and/or criminal justice process free from pressure by the institution; 
Participate in a process that is fair, impartial, and provides adequate notice and a meaningful opportunity 
to be heard; 
Be treated with dignity and to receive from the institution courteous, fair, and respectful health care and 
counseling services, where available; 
Be free from any suggestion that the reporting individual is at fault when these crimes and 
violations are committed, or should have acted in a different manner to avoid such crimes or 
violations; 
Describe the incident to as few institution representatives as practicable and not be required to 
unnecessarily repeat a description of the incident; 
Be protected from retaliation by the institution, any student, the accused and/or the respondent, and/or 
their friends, family and acquaintances within the jurisdiction of the institution; 
Access to at least one level of appeal of a determination; 
Page 24 
Rensselaer Handbook of Student Rights and Responsibilities, rev. January 6, 2025 
10. Be accompanied by an Advisor of choice who may assist and advise a reporting individual, accused, or 
respondent throughout the judicial or conduct process including during all meetings and hearings related to 
such process; and 
11. Exercise civil rights and practice of religion without interference by the investigative, criminal justice, or 
judicial or conduct process of the institution. 
At a hearing, Students also have the following procedural rights: 
1. 
The right to an Advisor of choice 
2. 
3. 
4. 
The right to be informed of the rules for participation at a hearing; 
Access to directly-related available evidence in the case file; and 
Right to make an impact statement regarding sanctions. 
The Sexual Misconduct Policy can be accessed in full at: https://sexualviolence.rpi.edu. 
Reporting Complaints of Sexual Harassment and Sexual Misconduct 
Individuals may report an allegation of Sexual Misconduct, including but not limited to Sexual Harassment, 
Sexual Violence, Dating and Domestic Violence and Stalking, that deny or limit an individual’s ability to 
participate in or benefit from the Institute’s programs or activities by visiting,   
https://sexualviolence.rpi.edu/reporting. Inquiries or reports may also be referred to Rensselaer’s Title IX 
Coordinators,  the Rensselaer Department of Public Safety, and/or to the U.S. Department of Education’s Office 
for Civil Rights:  
Office for Civil Rights, New York Office 
U.S. Department of Education 32 Old Slip, 26th Floor 
New York, NY 10005-2500 
Telephone: 646-428-3900 
FAX: 646-428-3843; TDD: 800-877-8339 
Email: OCR.NewYork@ed.gov 
Individuals may file a report directly with local law enforcement agencies by dialing 911. Individuals who want 
to report a sexual assault on a New York college campus to the New York State Police may call the dedicated 
24-hour hotline at (844) 845-7269. In an emergency, call 911 and ask for the New York State Police. To review 
support resources available, individuals may visit https://sexualviolence.rpi.edu/resources, and/or call the New 
York State Domestic and Sexual Violence Hotline at (800) 942-6906; in New York City, call (800) 621-HOPE 
(4673) or dial 311. 
Title IX Coordinators 
Rensselaer’s Title IX Coordinators are responsible for coordinating the Institute’s compliance with Title IX, and 
overseeing the Institute’s response to reports of alleged violations of Rensselaer’s policies regarding discrimination 
and Sexual Misconduct by students, staff, faculty, and third parties. 
All allegations of Sexual Harassment and Sexual Misconduct should ultimately be directed to a Title IX 
Coordinator. Additional information about Sexual Harassment  and Sexual Misconduct can be found by visiting 
https://sexualviolence.rpi.edu. 
NOTICE PURSUANT TO THE "CAMPUS SEX CRIMES PREVENTION ACT" AND CAMPUS CRIME 
REPORTING AND STATISTICS 
In accordance with Federal and State law, the following notice is provided: The Institute’s Annual Security Report 
contains all campus crime statistics reported to the Department of Education. The Annual Security Report is 
published by the Department of Public Safety, which is the designated college campus office authorized to 
provide such the campus crime statistics for the Institute. The Annual Security Report is located at: 
Page 25 
Rensselaer Handbook of Student Rights and Responsibilities, rev. January 6, 2025 
http://www.rpi.edu/dept/public_safety/stats/. The U.S. Department of Education website address for campus 
crime statistics is: https://ope.ed.gov/campussafety/#/. 
The Campus Climate Assessment is published by the Office of Human Resources, which is the designated 
college campus office authorized to provide such information for the Institute. The Campus Climate Assessment 
is located at: https://sexualviolence.rpi.edu/. 
In addition, information about sex offenders, if any, living or working at Rensselaer, will be available at the 
Department of Public Safety. For more information about, and access to, New York's "Sex Offender Registry," 
go to: http://www.criminaljustice.ny.gov/nsor/ .  
ALCOHOL AND OTHER DRUGS POLICY 
Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute is a campus where we place a high priority on the health and safety of all 
members of the campus community – students, faculty, staff and visitors. The Institute strives to provide an 
environment where all students are able to pursue their dreams and aspirations. At the same time, we face stark 
realities regarding the harm often caused by the use and abuse of alcohol and other drugs in communities around 
us and on our campus. In light of the risks and dangers presented by the use and abuse of alcohol and other 
drugs by students, we develop, promulgate, and enforce policies, procedures and accountabilities that reflect 
our institutional values. 
The Institute’s aim is to maintain an alcohol and other drug policy that is clear in its expectations; applies in an 
appropriate manner across student residential and organizational affiliations; informs and educates individuals 
with regard to the policy and the risk factors associated with use or abuse; creates an environment that promotes 
safety and individual accountability; and maintains a healthy campus community where problems associated 
with alcohol and other drugs are minimal. 
The overall philosophy of the Institute is that individuals and organizations in the Rensselaer community are 
responsible for their own actions. When making decisions to consume an alcoholic beverage or to provide 
alcoholic beverages to others, individuals and organizations must be mindful of the inherent consequences and 
risks involved. In addition, they are responsible for understanding and complying with applicable laws. The 
Institute will not shield individuals or organizations from the legal consequences of their actions should they 
choose to violate these laws. 
This policy applies as stated, regardless of state, locality or other jurisdiction in which the offense occurs. The 
regulations in this policy are designed to encourage consistent and reasonable standards in our campus 
community. It is expected that all members will contribute to maintaining a positive and healthy living and learning 
environment by adhering to this policy. The Institute Alcohol and Other Drug Policy contains sections on: 
I. 
II. 
III. 
IV. 
V. 
VI. 
State and Local Law Related to Alcohol 
Institute Regulations on Alcohol (printed below) 
Approval Procedures for On-Campus Events 
Specific Area Policies for Alcohol 
The Law: Statutes Regarding Other Drugs 
Institute Regulations on Other Drugs (printed below) 
VII. Alcohol and Other Drug Policy Responsibility and Enforcement 
VIII. Violations/Sanctions (printed below) 
IX. 
Institute Alcohol Review Committee (ARC) 
X. 
XI. 
Rensselaer Good Samaritan Policy (printed below) 
Rensselaer’s Alcohol & Other Drug Education Prevention Program 
In accordance with the Drug Free Schools and Communities Act (1989), the complete Rensselaer Alcohol and 
Page 26 
Rensselaer Handbook of Student Rights and Responsibilities, rev. January 6, 2025 
Other Drugs Policy for Students (“AOD Policy”) is available at: https://info.rpi.edu/dean-students/student
rights-responsibilities-and-conduct  
INSTITUTE REGULATIONS ON ALCOHOL 
(Section II, Rensselaer Alcohol and Other Drugs Policy for Students) 
The unlawful manufacture, distribution, dispensing, possession, or use of alcohol is prohibited on Institute 
property or as part of any activity sanctioned or sponsored by the Institute. The administration at Rensselaer will 
not authorize events where drinking under the legal age, as determined by applicable law, will be knowingly 
permitted. Individuals and organizations who sponsor approved events involving alcoholic beverages shall 
assume full responsibility and liability for the event and for the behavior of event participants and attendees. 
In our continuing commitment to adhere to Institute policy and applicable laws, it is the historical and regular practice 
to issue a minimum disciplinary suspension of two years (6 consecutive semesters) to any Rensselaer recognized 
student organization found to have served alcohol to an underage individual at any Institute or group sanctioned or 
sponsored activity (on or off campus.) It is the hearing officer’s role to consider the unique details of each incident 
and apply an appropriate sanction(s) with the agreement of the Dean of Students. In addition, all organization 
alcohol privileges are subject to revocation while a group is under investigation and for the duration of the 
disciplinary process.  
Note: Vaporizing, inhaling, and other methods of absorbing alcohol are also considered consumption of alcohol, 
and are also prohibited. 
A. Possession or consumption of alcoholic beverages is prohibited: 
1. At all Institute owned, controlled, or affiliated residential facilities that house undergraduate students; 
2. At the residential facilities of any recognized or affiliated student organizations, or groups, including but 
not limited to fraternities and sororities; 
3. On campus, on Institute property, at Institute events, and at events or programs held or sponsored by the 
Institute or by Rensselaer student organizations, except in accordance with this policy by persons 21 
years of age or older as follows: - 
At events held at approved locations, other than residential facilities described in A.1 and A.2 
above, for which required approvals have been obtained pursuant to Section III and Section IV 
(D) of this policy; - 
In areas licensed for regular beer and wine service 
B. Possession or consumption of alcohol by any person under age 21 on campus is a violation of this policy and 
the Rensselaer Grounds for Disciplinary Action (GDA) for students; such conduct on the part of an employee is 
a violation of Human Resources policies. 
C. Any person under age 21 who misrepresents their age in order to obtain alcohol has violated the GDA if that 
person is a student; such conduct on the part of an employee is a violation of Human Resources policies. 
D. Any person who supplies or makes alcohol available to someone under age 21 has violated this policy and 
the law. If that person is a student, they have violated the GDA; such conduct on the part of an employee is 
a violation of Human Resources policies. 
E. In accordance with state law, no money may be charged for any event at which alcoholic beverages are 
present unless a license or permit is obtained from the state liquor authority. 
F. An Institute alcohol permit must be obtained from the Alcohol Review Committee (c/o the Student Health Center) 
for any event occurring on Institute grounds at which alcohol is served or present. Exceptions are: - - 
Licensed designated area of Rensselaer Union; or 
Buildings leased or rented to faculty, staff or private non-student groups 
G. The consumption of alcohol or possession of an open container of alcohol is prohibited in all generally 
accessible or common areas on campus, including but not limited to corridors, stairwells, athletic facilities, 
Page 27 
Rensselaer Handbook of Student Rights and Responsibilities, rev. January 6, 2025 
elevators, lounges, classrooms, labs or outside campus areas (i.e. Quad) unless an alcohol permit has been 
obtained for a designated area. At no time may alcohol be consumed in potentially hazardous environments. 
H. Displays of any alcohol related items or materials visible to the public; including but not limited to alcoholic 
beverage containers (empty or full), banners or signs are not allowed in any residential facility. 
I. 
J. 
Events shall not include any activity which encourages the use and/or abuse of alcohol. 
The serving or availability of alcohol at events being held in or about an undergraduate or student 
organization residential facility as described in Section II (A) is prohibited. 
K. The presence, possession, or use of large quantities of alcohol on campus including but not limited to kegs, 
beer balls, or any other bulk containers of alcohol, is prohibited on Institute grounds with the exception of 
areas holding NYS license for beer and wine service. 
L. 
Beverages containing hard alcohol (defined as 15% or more alcohol by volume (ABV)) are prohibited at 
events involving students. 
M. Alcohol will not be permitted at Rensselaer athletic events. 
N. Off campus events: It is expected that all members of the Rensselaer community will comply with all 
governmental laws related to alcohol. Any Rensselaer group that plans an off-campus event involving 
alcohol must adhere to the Rensselaer Alcohol and Other Drug Policy for students. Faculty and staff must 
adhere to applicable Human Resources Policy. 
O. Advertising of any event must not imply that the event is for the purpose of consuming alcohol and may not 
be displayed before the permit to serve alcohol is obtained. No specific mention of alcohol is allowed in the 
advertising. The words "beverages" and "refreshments" are acceptable. 
P. At any event where alcohol is available, a non-alcoholic beverage (in addition to water) must be equally and 
continuously accessible and available. 
Q. Alcohol may not be served at any event unless food is also served. The food should include items high in 
protein and carbohydrates. 
R. The sponsor or host is responsible for implementing reasonable measures to ensure that alcohol is not 
served or made available to persons under age 21 or who are intoxicated. Sponsors must ensure that all 
alcoholic beverages are provided by a licensed third party vendor who will certify that all servers are properly 
trained. Contact the Alcohol Review Committee (“ARC”) for training information. 
S. The server(s) of alcohol will be sober and must not consume alcoholic beverages prior to, or during the 
event, or on the premises where the event is held. 
T. Guests will not be allowed to bring additional alcohol to an event. The only alcohol permitted for 
consumption is that specified on the ARC permit. 
U. "BYO" (“Bring Your Own”) Alcohol events will not be permitted. 
V. Positive proof of age is required at any event at which alcohol is served and/or consumed. No licensee, or 
agent, or employee of such licensee shall accept as written evidence of age by any such person for the 
purchase or service of any alcoholic beverage, any documentation other than: 
(i) 
(ii) 
(iii) 
a valid driver’s license or non-driver identification card issued by the commissioner of motor vehicle, 
the federal government, any United States territory, commonwealth or possession, the District of 
Columbia, a state government within the United States or a provincial government of the dominion of 
Canada, or 
a valid passport issued by the United States government or any other country, or 
an identification card issued by the armed forces of the United States. 
W. The serving or availability of alcohol must be limited to a single designated point of service. 
Consumption of alcohol is only permitted in the approved area designated for the event. 
X. Alcohol and Drug Policies for faculty and staff are contained in the Human Resources Policy Guidelines 
Page 28 
Rensselaer Handbook of Student Rights and Responsibilities, rev. January 6, 2025 
Manual (#800.4, Alcohol Use and Possession; and 800.5, Use and Possession of Illegal Drugs). 
EVENTS WITH ALCOHOL SPONSORED BY STUDENT ORGANIZATIONS, INCLUDING FRATERNITIES 
AND SORORITIES (Section IV D, Rensselaer Alcohol and Drug Policy for Students (AOD Policy)) 
An event, especially those including alcohol service, is deemed to be the responsibility of a student 
organization(s) when the Institute judicial process has determined that the details of the event indicate such. 
Examples of qualifying details include but are not limited to; the number of members of a particular organization 
relative to the total organization membership and/or the number of attendees of the event, the funding of the 
event by an organization or its members, the location of the event, the planning and/or promotion of the event by 
the organization or by members of the organization. The reference to student organizations includes, but is not 
limited to, recognized social fraternities and sororities, intercollegiate, intramural and club sports teams. 
Student organizations are subject to the following policies and guidelines established by the Institute and/or 
consistent with any regional or national umbrella affiliate or association (e.g., Interfraternity Council, MSFC, 
or Panhellenic Council, NIC) policies and regulations, whichever is most restrictive: 
1. All events must comply with the rules for events set forth in Sections II and III of this Policy (the AOD Policy). 
2. No hard alcohol (beverages with 15% or more ABV) is allowed at any student sponsored event. 
3. Non-alcoholic beverages, in addition to water, must be made available by the host organization at any 
event where alcohol is available (section II, P, AOD Policy). 
4. Alcoholic beverages may not be purchased or brought into the event except by a licensed third party 
vendor (section II, E, AOD Policy). 
5. All events are restricted to a designated number of invited guests and not to exceed the legal limit of 
persons allowed in a facility or its common area, whichever is most restrictive. 
6. Open social events are prohibited (An open social event is defined as any event for which no 
invitation is given and/or general advertising is used). 
7. Alcohol service at any event must be by a licensed third-party vendor. 
8. Any event sponsored, hosted or organized by a group, club, or organization, or members of, must be a 
registered with and approved by: the Associate Dean, Greek Life Commons, for social fraternity and 
sorority events; or the Associate Director, Student Activities, for events to be held by other student 
organizations. Event registration must meet the following criteria: 
a. Hosting organization name; 
b. Date, time and location of event including the length of the event; 
c. Name/contact information of licensed third-party vendor who will serve at event; 
c. Process used to notify neighbors, if in a residential area; 
d. Designated contact person, cell phone number; 
e. Membership list; 
f. 
Invitation list; 
g. Confirmed attendance list differentiating 21 and over and under 21 attendees; 
h. Hand stamp or wrist band for attendees 21 or over 
i. 
Personal identification required to verify date of birth (as described in, section II, V, AOD Policy). 
9. The event must be at an approved location other than the organization’s residential facility or chapter 
house. If the event is to be held on campus, an alcohol permit must also be obtained from the Alcohol 
Review Committee, pursuant to Section III of the AOD Policy. 
INSTITUTE REGULATIONS ON OTHER DRUGS 
(Section IV, Rensselaer Alcohol and Other Drugs Policy for Students) 
Rensselaer has implemented a zero tolerance drug policy which strictly prohibits: 
Page 29 
Rensselaer Handbook of Student Rights and Responsibilities, rev. January 6, 2025 
• Possession, use, or facilitation of use of any “Prohibited Substances” or “Drug Paraphernalia” as defined 
herein; and 
• Attempted or actual sale, manufacture, marketing, trafficking, or transfer of any Prohibited Substance, 
or Drug Paraphernalia. 
Prohibited Substances are any of the following for which the individual does not have a legal license or valid 
prescription: any illegal drug, controlled substance (as defined by State and Federal law), or substance, or 
manner of use, that is generally recognized as being detrimental or dangerous to the health, welfare or safety of 
individuals or the community, although not necessarily illegal (including but not limited to Molly, Spice, K-2, 
whippets, performance enhancing drugs, prescription drugs, and research drugs). 
Drug Paraphernalia is equipment, products, or materials primarily used for the purpose of making, using 
concealing, or distributing Prohibited Substances. 
Students found responsible for any of the above behaviors are subject to the sanctions set forth herein. 
Notwithstanding state law that may de-criminalize use and possession of marijuana in certain circumstances 
(e.g., the possession of a State-issued medical marijuana license, prescription or the equivalent), Rensselaer 
strictly prohibits the use, facilitation of use, consumption, possession, sale, manufacture, marketing, trafficking 
or transfer of marijuana or THC in any of its forms. Any student with a disability who believes they may require 
access to a Prohibited Substance is required to contact the Office of Disability Services for Students to discuss 
accommodations and support. 
Rensselaer is an educational institution and not a law enforcement agency, and therefore does not apply 
sanctions of the law. However, Rensselaer will not disregard the law and will not shield individuals from the legal 
consequences of their actions should they violate the law. In addition, individuals who have violated the law are 
also subject to disciplinary action. Students will be disciplined according to the procedures in this document and 
the Rensselaer Handbook of Student Rights and Responsibilities. Pursuant to the Higher Education Opportunity 
Act of 2008 the conviction of a student for any offense, during a period of enrollment for which the student was 
receiving Title IV, HEA program funds, under any federal or state law involving the possession or sale of illegal 
drugs will result in the loss of eligibility for any Title IV, HEA grant, loan, or work study assistance (HEA 
Sec.484(r) (1)); (20 U.S.C. 1091(r) (1)). 
These Regulations on Other Drugs apply to all admitted students, including enrolled and non-enrolled 
students, for conduct that occurs both on- and off-campus and regardless of state, locality, or other legal 
jurisdiction. In addition, the potential loss of financial aid eligibility due to a drug-related conviction applies 
regardless of where the illegal conduct occurs. 
ENFORCEMENT OF REGULATIONS ON OTHER DRUGS 
In addition to possible prosecution under state or federal laws, persons who violate the prohibitions of this policy 
will be subject to disciplinary sanctions that may include, but are not limited to, suspension, expulsion, and/or 
referral for possible prosecution by federal or state authorities. Any disciplinary sanction imposed may also 
include the completion of an appropriate rehabilitation program and other requirements as a condition of 
reinstatement. 
1. Prohibited Substances Hearing Board 
Upon completion of the judicial inquiry, the Prohibited Substances Hearing Board has jurisdiction over appeals 
of findings issued and sanctions assigned concerning these Institute Regulations on Other Drugs. The Prohibited 
Substances Hearing Board shall be comprised of three Institute judicial hearing officers as designated by the 
Dean of Students. Appeals from decisions by the Prohibited Substances Hearing Board may be taken to the 
Review Board and Provost as described in the Handbook. 
Page 30 
Rensselaer Handbook of Student Rights and Responsibilities, rev. January 6, 2025 
When an appeal is filed concerning an incident or series of related incidents that involves both a violation of 
Institute Regulations on Other Drugs and other Institute policies, the Prohibited Substances Hearing Board will 
review the appeal of both Institute Regulations on Other Drugs violation and such other Institute policies, with 
the following exceptions: a) any alleged violations of the Sexual Misconduct Policy will be handled in accordance 
with that policy, and b) if a judicial inquiry determines that a student did not violate the Institute Regulations on 
Other Drugs but that the student did violate other Institute policies, an appeal of the findings will be referred to 
the Student Judicial Board. 
2. Mandatory Minimum Sanctions 
The following shall be considered mandatory minimum sanctions: 
A. For Trafficking Violations 
Rensselaer has a zero tolerance policy for any student found to have engaged in the sale, manufacture, 
marketing, trafficking or transfer of any Prohibited Substance, including marijuana or THC, drug paraphernalia, 
or the intent and preparation to do so (hereinafter, trafficking). The penalty for students found to have engaged 
in such trafficking, including a first violation, will be expulsion from the Institute, without possibility of return. 
B. For Use or Possession of Prohibited Substances (excludes marijuana/THC use) 
In conformance with Rensselaer’s zero tolerance drug use policy, any student found to have engaged in a 
violation of this policy related to the personal, non-trafficking use, consumption or possession of a Prohibited 
Substance other than marijuana or THC use or prescription drug/over-the-counter medication misuse shall be 
subject to the following minimum sanctions: 
• First Violation – if no finding of habitual use: Immediate suspension from the Institute for a term of not less 
than one (1) calendar year. After the expiration of such term of suspension, and provided the student has had 
no other suspensions, expulsions or involuntary withdrawals for violation of Rensselaer’s or any other 
institution’s drug policy, the student, may be permitted to re-apply for admission to Rensselaer. Reapplication 
for admission hereunder is subject to the terms for Disciplinary Suspension found in the Rensselaer 
Handbook of Student Rights & Responsibilities under the section entitled Types of Disciplinary Actions. 
Conditions for readmission may include, but are not limited to, mandatory educational programming and/or 
training, counseling, drug testing, supervision, restriction or loss of privileges, or other requirements. If such 
student is not granted permission to re-apply for admission, or where such re-application is denied, the 
student shall be deemed to have been expelled. 
• Second Violation, or First Violation with a finding of habitual use: The student shall be immediately 
expelled from the Institute without the possibility of return. 
A determination that a student is a habitual user of Prohibited Substances may occur through external police, 
internal Public Safety, Student Life or other information sources that make the condition known to the 
Administration of the Institute. Each allegation will be investigated and corroborated through whatever channels 
are available. Rensselaer, in its sole and exclusive discretion, reserves the right to obtain medical advice and 
assistance to determine whether the subject of the inquiry is a habitual user of any Prohibited Substance. Parents 
or guardians of the subject may be notified immediately of a person identified as being a habitual user of a 
Prohibited Substance and subject to this policy. 
C. For Use or Possession of Marijuana/THC and Possession of Drug Paraphernalia 
Any student found to have engaged in a violation of this policy relating to the personal, non-trafficking use, 
consumption or possession of marijuana/THC or possession of drug paraphernalia shall be subject to the 
following: 
Rensselaer Handbook of Student Rights and Responsibilities, rev. January 6, 2025 
Page 31 
• First Violation: Sanctions as determined by the Rensselaer Judicial Process, including but not limited to, 
disciplinary probation, referral for required educational programming and training, substance use assessment, 
restriction or loss of privileges, or other requirements as severity of the offense dictates, including the loss of 
housing privileges, substance use assessment, required treatment, and/or drug testing. 
• Second Violation: The student shall be suspended from the Institute for a term of not less than one (1) 
calendar year. After the expiration of such term of suspension, and provided the student has had no other 
suspensions, expulsions or involuntary withdrawals for violation of Rensselaer’s or any other institution’s drug 
policy, the student, may be permitted to re-apply for admission to Rensselaer. Reapplication for admission 
hereunder is subject to the terms for Disciplinary Suspension found in the Rensselaer Handbook of Student 
Rights & Responsibilities under the section entitled Types of Disciplinary Actions. Conditions for readmission 
may include, but are not limited to, mandatory educational programming and/or training, counseling, drug 
testing, supervision, restriction or loss of privileges, or other requirements. If such student is not granted 
permission to apply for re-admission, or where such re-application is denied, the student shall be deemed to 
have been expelled. 
VIOLATIONS/SANCTIONS 
(Section VIII, Rensselaer Alcohol and Other Drug Policy for Students) 
A. Violations of the Alcohol and Other Drug Policy by any student shall constitute a violation of the Grounds 
for Disciplinary Action. Person(s) shall be subject to disciplinary action up to and including dismissal from 
the Institute. 
B. Possible sanctions are outlined for students in this document and the Rensselaer Handbook of Student 
Rights and Responsibilities, and for employees in the Human Resources Policy Guidelines. 
C. Judicial Actions and sanctions for students under this Alcohol and Other Drugs Policy are subject to the 
Institute’s Good Samaritan Policy and the provisions for Alcohol and Drug Use Amnesty in the Rensselaer 
Sexual Misconduct Policy. 
D. Violations by any faculty and staff members of the Human Resources Policy #800.4, Alcohol Use and 
Possession and/or #800.5, Use and Possession of Illegal Drugs shall be subject to disciplinary action up 
to and including the termination of employment. Violations by vendors, contractors or visitors of this 
Policy may result in those individuals being prohibited from entering or remaining on campus facilities 
owned, leased or controlled by the Institute. 
RENSSELAER GOOD SAMARITAN POLICY 
(Section X, Rensselaer Alcohol and Other Drug Policy) 
Student health and safety are primary concerns of the Rensselaer community. It is imperative that someone call 
for medical assistance when an individual is a victim of and/or experiences alcohol intoxication, drug overdose, 
or serious injury after consuming alcohol or other drugs. In general, people may be reluctant to seek emergency 
or medical attention for fear of judicial consequences for themselves, the person in need of assistance, and/or 
the organization hosting the event where the situation occurs. 
Since these situations are potentially life threatening, Rensselaer seeks to reduce barriers to seeking assistance. 
The Good Samaritan Policy is part of Rensselaer’s approach to reducing harmful consequences caused by the 
consumption of alcohol and other drugs. The Good Samaritan Policy is the Institute’s commitment to increase 
the likelihood that community members will call for assistance when faced with an alcohol or drug-related 
emergency. 
An individual who receives emergency assistance and/or medical treatment due to alcohol or drug consumption 
and completes an alcohol and other drugs assessment, education activities, and/or treatment as assigned 
Rensselaer Handbook of Student Rights and Responsibilities, rev. January 6, 2025 
Page 32 
through the Rensselaer Health Center will not be subject to judicial action for violating Institute Alcohol & Other 
Drugs Policy. 
A person who calls for emergency assistance and/or medical treatment due to alcohol or drug consumption on 
behalf of another person will not be subject to judicial action for violating Institute Alcohol & Other Drugs Policy, 
but may be required to attend an alcohol and other drugs education program if deemed necessary by the 
Rensselaer Health Center. 
A representative of an organization hosting an event is expected to promptly call for emergency assistance 
and/or medical attention due to evidence of a potential health or other emergency resulting from consumption 
of alcohol or other drugs by a guest at the event. This act of responsibility will mitigate the judicial 
consequences against the organization, resulting in non-punitive alternative sanctions against the organization 
for violations of the Institute’s Alcohol & Other Drug Policy at the time of the incident. However, failure to call for 
emergency assistance and/or medical treatment will be considered an “intolerable circumstance” affecting 
judicial sanctions against the organization and persons found to be knowledgeable and/or responsible for the 
event if violations of Grounds for Disciplinary Action have occurred. 
Requirement to Obtain Medical Assistance: Rensselaer students, student organizations, and other members 
of the Rensselaer Community are required to summon emergency medical services (by calling 911 or 
Rensselaer Public Safety at (518)276-6611) to obtain assistance and evaluation for any person who is in their 
room or immediate presence and is, or is suspected to be, under the influence of alcohol or other prohibited 
substances, when that person’s well-being and safety is known to be or reasonably should be known to be in 
jeopardy. When an individual knows or reasonably should know that another person is in jeopardy, failing to 
summon emergency medical services (e.g. taking the person back to their residence and dropping them off, 
driving the person to a hospital in a personal vehicle, asking another person to take responsibility for the 
intoxicated individual without seeking medical assistance for the ill person) shall be considered a violation of 
this policy. 
Alcohol and Drug Use Amnesty under the Sexual Misconduct Policy 
The health and safety of every student at Rensselaer is of utmost importance. Rensselaer recognizes that 
students who have been drinking and/or using drugs (whether such use is voluntary or involuntary) at the time 
that violence, including but not limited to domestic violence, dating violence, stalking, or sexual assault occurs 
may be hesitant to report such incidents due to fear of potential consequences for their own conduct. Rensselaer 
strongly encourages students to report domestic violence, dating violence, stalking, or sexual assault to 
institution officials. A bystander acting in good faith or a reporting individual acting in good faith that discloses 
any incident of domestic violence, dating violence, stalking, or sexual assault to Rensselaer officials or law 
enforcement will not be subject to the Rensselaer code of conduct action for violations of alcohol and/or drug 
use policies occurring at or near the time of the commission of the domestic violence, dating violence, stalking, 
or sexual assault. However, the use of alcohol or other drugs will never function as a defense for any behavior 
that violates the Rensselaer Sexual Misconduct Policy. 
POLICY ON TOBACCO USE AND SMOKING 
In keeping with Rensselaer's desire to protect the health of its faculty, staff, students, visitors, other campus 
constituencies, and the public in general, it is Rensselaer's policy to provide a tobacco-free, smoking-free 
environment in all Institute facilities and outdoor areas in full conformance with applicable statutes including the 
New York State Clean Indoor Air Act (Public Health Law Article 13-E)  
It is also the policy of Rensselaer to prohibit the sale of tobacco and smoking products on campus. Rensselaer 
prohibits the act of using any tobacco or smoking product in any Institute facility or outdoor area, including, but 
not limited to chewing tobacco, smokeless tobacco, electronic cigarettes (with or without nicotine, tobacco and/or 
tobacco products), electronic devices (i.e., vaping) and the act of smoking or carrying a lighted cigar, cigarette, 
pipe or any other smoking material or device. The full policy can be found at https://hr.rpi.edu/policies- 
Page 33 
Rensselaer Handbook of Student Rights and Responsibilities, rev. January 6, 2025 
procedures. 
STUDENT LIVING AND LEARNING POLICIES 
The purpose of the Student Living and Learning Policies are to outline the regulations and procedures that will 
apply to the provision of housing to students and others at Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute. 
As part of CLASS, all students are required to live in Rensselaer residence halls (and participate in a dining plan) 
during the freshman and sophomore years, and while participating in The Arch summer session. Sophomore 
students may be granted a housing waiver allowing them to live in approved Fraternity and Sorority Commons 
housing by completing the Fraternity and Sorority Commons Waiver before the sophomore lottery begins, 
provided that the applicable fraternity or sorority organization is in good standing and has signed the current 
Fraternity and Sorority Commons Agreement (which may be modified from time-to-time) and is operating in 
compliance with that agreement. All other Rensselaer students, including graduate students, seniors, and 
juniors (while not participating in The Arch summer term), may choose to live off-campus provided they are not 
living in the residence of a fraternity or sorority whose recognition has been revoked or suspended by the 
Institute, or is not formally recognized by the Institute. Except where the Institute has determined that an 
ongoing health or safety situation exists, upperclassmen and graduate students living in the Fraternity and 
Sorority organization residence at the time the revocation or suspension takes effect may remain in residence 
until the end of the then-current academic semester. Undergraduate students transferring to Rensselaer after 
their sophomore year are required to live in Rensselaer housing for at least one year (unless space is not 
available) to facilitate the transition, develop a strong connection to the campus and the multitude of available 
resources. 
In addition to residence hall specific community expectations, students must assume the responsibilities outlined 
in the Student Living and Learning Policies, as well as abide by all local, state, and federal laws. 
Such rules and regulations, together with those outlined in The Rensselaer Handbook of Student Rights and 
Responsibilities, the Residence Agreement, and other Student Living and Learning publications, are conditions 
of occupancy for all residence hall and apartment residents. 
It is each resident's obligation to be familiar with these policies. Violators are subject to disciplinary action. 
The full Student Living and Learning Policies can be found at https://sll.rpi.edu/residential-commons/living- 
learning 
NETWORK AND SYSTEM USE AT RENSSELAER – CYBER CITIZENSHIP POLICY 
The ethical principles that apply to everyday academic community life also apply to the use of information and 
networking resources. Every member of the Rensselaer community has basic rights and responsibilities. It is 
unethical for anyone to violate these rights or ignore these responsibilities. 
Furthermore, everything that is technically possible is not necessarily ethical or legal. Anyone who uses 
Rensselaer's computer systems and networks is responsible for meeting the standards outlined in Rensselaer's 
policy. 
To participate in community life, we expect for ourselves and extend to others the freedom to express ideas and 
a respect for privacy, for property, and for the environment in which we work. In community life, these 
expectations are reflected in the privileges and responsibilities afforded to each of its members. 
The privilege of access to Rensselaer's information systems imposes certain responsibilities and obligations and 
is granted subject to Institute policies and local, state, and federal laws. (The phrase "Rensselaer's information 
systems" refers to Rensselaer’s network and all of Rensselaer’s information resources and services.) 
Page 34 
Rensselaer Handbook of Student Rights and Responsibilities, rev. January 6, 2025 
Appropriate use should always be ethical, reflect academic honesty and community standards, show restraint in 
the consumption of shared resources, and be in compliance with Rensselaer's policies and state and federal 
law. It should demonstrate respect for intellectual property; ownership of data; system security mechanisms; and 
individuals' rights to privacy and to freedom from intimidation, discrimination, harassment, and unwarranted 
annoyance. Appropriate use of Rensselaer's information systems includes instruction; independent study; 
authorized research; independent research; communication; and official work of the offices, units, recognized 
student and campus organizations, and agencies of the Institute. 
The complete text of Rensselaer's Cyber Citizenship Policy, outlining the privileges, responsibilities, and 
obligations of those who participate in Rensselaer's electronic community, is available at 
https://policy.rpi.edu/policy/cyber-citizenship. Students may also request extra copies from the Voorhees 
Computing Center Help Desk or the Dean of Students Office. 
The Cyber Citizenship Policy is an Institute wide policy intended to allow for the proper use of all 
Rensselaer's information systems, effective protection of individual users, equitable access, and proper 
management of those resources. It should be taken in the broadest possible sense and applies to Rensselaer 
network usage even in situations where it would not apply to the devices in use (for example, student-owned 
devices connected to the campus network). The policy is intended to supplement, not replace, all existing laws, 
regulations, agreements, contracts, and Rensselaer policies that currently apply to these services. 
The policy contains sections on: 
• Appropriate Use and Authorized Users 
• Responsibilities and Privileges 
• Prohibitions 
• Relationship to Other Policies 
• Reporting Violations 
• Enforcement and Sanctions 
As a condition of using information systems at Rensselaer, you must be familiar with this policy and observe it. 
Persons in violation of the policy are subject to the full range of sanctions, including, but not limited to, the loss of 
computer or network access privileges, disciplinary action, dismissal from the Institute, and legal action. Some 
violations may constitute criminal offenses and be subject to local, state, and/or federal prosecution. 
TECHNOLOGY COMMERCIALIZATION AND INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY 
All students, faculty, staff, and others participating in Rensselaer programs are subject to the provisions, 
obligations, and responsibilities set forth in the Intellectual Property Policy of the Institute 
(https://research.rpi.edu/policy) as it may be amended from time to time. This policy is binding on all members 
of the Rensselaer community, whether or not an individual has signed a separate intellectual property 
agreement with Rensselaer or any third party. 
This policy covers the ownership, distribution, and commercial development of intellectual property, whether or 
not such intellectual property is patentable, copyrightable, subject to trademark registration, or some other means 
of formal protection. Copies of this policy are available in all Deans' offices, as well as the offices of the Provost 
and Vice President for Research. 
UNMANNED AERIAL VEHICLES (UAVs) 
The operation of unmanned aerial vehicles (UAVs) or “drones” over Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute property 
is prohibited except where specifically authorized in writing for research, educational, and other purposes 
consistent with Rensselaer’s mission. UAV operation is regulated by the Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) 
and, in some cases, local law. 
Page 35 
Rensselaer Handbook of Student Rights and Responsibilities, rev. January 6, 2025 
All UAV operations that are conducted as part of an authorized Rensselaer activity (including, but not limited to 
classroom, research, or club activities) must comply with all FAA regulations regardless of whether they occur 
over Rensselaer property. These regulations differ somewhat depending on whether the UAV is operated: 
a) by a student for unpaid educational use. See https://www.faa.gov/uas/recreational_fliers/ (Note: The 
FAA refers to this as “recreational” use, but has interpreted this use to include operation by students 
as a component of curricula at an accredited educational institution); or 
b) by a faculty member, employee, or contractor as part of their job duties, including a research or 
classroom activity. See: https://www.faa.gov/uas/educational_users/ (Note: These rules include a 
requirement that the operator hold a Remote Pilot Certificate for operation of UAV). 
The UAV operator is responsible for understanding and following these regulations. 
In all cases, Rensselaer requires that the following rules be followed, absent special permission in writing 
issued by the Rensselaer Director of Public Safety or his/her designee: 
a) The UAV must be registered with the FAA, as required by law: 
https://www.faa.gov/uas/getting_started/register_drone  
b) The UAV must weigh less than 10 lbs. 
c) The UAV must remain within the line of site of the operator at all times. 
d) The UAV must remain below 400ft above ground level, and fly at a velocity at or below 50 mph. 
e) The UAV must not be flown over residential areas, or in other areas where persons are likely to be 
outdoors, including parks, schools or campuses, business or retail areas, stadiums, beaches, or 
outdoor events. 
f) 
The UAV must be operated in daylight hours only. 
g) The UAV must be operated in a safe manner. 
h) The UAV may not be used to stalk, harass, surveil, follow, intimidate, or monitor individuals. 
i) 
The operator of the UAV must at all times comply with Rensselaer’s Policy on Electronic 
Citizenship, and other Rensselaer policies. 
j) 
No photography or video may be taken by the UAV unless specifically authorized in writing by Rensselaer’s 
Vice President for Strategic Communications and External Relations. 
Seeking Permission to Operate an UAV Over Rensselaer Property:  
Written permission must be obtained to operate a UAV over Institute property (including any buildings, grounds, 
or land that is owned by Rensselaer or controlled by Rensselaer via leases or other formal contractual 
arrangements). Permission may be granted only for specific time periods and only for the specific geographic 
flight areas designated in the written permission. In general, permission will not be granted to conduct UAV 
operations over the main Troy campus including in student residential areas. To be eligible to seek permission, 
the proposed UAV flight must be part of an authorized Rensselaer activity (including, but not limited to 
classroom, research, or club activities). 
• Permission for UAV operations related to a class, academic research, or a school-sponsored organization 
must be obtained in writing from the Dean or Assistant Dean of the School and from the Rensselaer 
Department of Public Safety. 
• Permission for UAV operations related to Rensselaer student clubs and organizations that are not 
sponsored by a School must be approved in writing by the Dean of Students, and by the 
Rensselaer Department of Public Safety. 
Permission must first be obtained from the designated Dean/Assistant Dean, and then submitted to the 
Page 36 
Rensselaer Handbook of Student Rights and Responsibilities, rev. January 6, 2025 
Rensselaer Department of Public Safety at least 5 days prior to the planned operation. The operator is 
responsible for complying with any conditions imposed by the Department of Public Safety in granting the 
permission. 
Third Party Operations. Any UAV operations over Rensselaer Property shall be for research, educational, and 
other purposes consistent with Rensselaer’s mission. No third party shall conduct such operations unless 
retained or sponsored by a Rensselaer staff or faculty member who follows the Approval and Notification 
procedures set forth above, The Rensselaer faculty or staff sponsor shall be responsible for ensuring that the 
party conducting the operations is aware of this policy and shall accompany the third party during flight 
operations. 
Accidents. Any accident involving the UAV that results in damage to a person or property must be reported 
immediately to the Rensselaer Department of Public Safety. 
FAMILY EDUCATIONAL RIGHTS AND PRIVACY ACT (FERPA) 
Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute complies with the Family Educational Rights and Privacy Act of 1974 (Section 
438 of the General Education Provisions Act, Title IV of Public Law 90-247), as amended. This Act provides that 
students attending any post-secondary educational institution which receives federal funds are entitled to access 
to their education records kept by the institution in order to inspect and review those records. Students are 
entitled to petition the Institute for the amendment or correction of any information in their education records 
which they feel is inaccurate, misleading, or otherwise in violation of their privacy or other rights. Guidelines are 
also provided for the conduct of informal and formal hearings at which a student may present evidence that the 
records are inaccurate or misleading and seek to have them amended or corrected. Rensselaer also intends to 
comply fully with provisions of the Act which limit the disclosure of certain information contained in students’ 
education records to the following circumstances: 
a) with the student’s prior written consent; 
b) as an item of directory information* (as defined in the Institute’s compliance policies) which the 
student has not refused to permit the Institute to disclose; 
c) under the provisions of the Act which allow a university to disclose information without the student’s 
prior written consent (see the Institute’s compliance policies). 
In certain circumstances, FERPA permits education records to be disclosed by the Institute without the student’s 
consent, including to parents or legal guardians of dependent students as that term is defined in the Internal 
Revenue Code. 
In general, Rensselaer presumes that undergraduate students at Rensselaer are dependent students, which 
permits RPI to give parents access to their education records. However, under the FERPA Compliance Policy, 
parents of a students who submit to the office of the Registrar appropriate documentation to establish that they 
should be considered independent of their parents will not be entitled to such access unless other provisions of 
FERPA allow for such access. (Note: Dependency status used in financial aid determinations may be different 
from that as defined in FERPA.) Graduate students are not considered dependents. 
Parents of our students play an integral role in their students’ experience. They nurture, support, and challenge 
their student to succeed. They are almost always in the best position to address the well-being of their student. 
Accordingly, subject to Rensselaer’s FERPA Compliance Policy and to the extent permitted by law, Rensselaer 
will generally notify parents of undergraduate students in the following circumstances without the requirement of 
consent from the student: 
• any separation from the Institute, including academic suspensions and dismissals, disciplinary 
suspensions and expulsions, mandatory financial leaves of absence, personal leaves of absence and 
withdrawals, administrative leaves of absence, and involuntary leaves of absence; 
Page 37 
Rensselaer Handbook of Student Rights and Responsibilities, rev. January 6, 2025 
• when a student is placed on probation or continued on probation; 
• In other circumstances authorized by the Dean of Students where parental notification is believed to be 
in the best interests of the student’s well-being. 
Nothing about this policy is intended to impose an obligation or duty on the Institute to notify parents. Moreover, 
Rensselaer fully reserves its rights to make disclosures in all other circumstances permitted by FERPA, some of 
which may be made to persons other than parents without student consent and regardless of dependency status 
of the student. See Rensselaer’s FERPA Compliance Policy for details 
(https://info.rpi.edu/sites/default/files/Statement%20of%20Compliance%20with%20FERPA.pdf). 
* Directory Information: The Institute intends to make certain “directory information” available for public use. 
This would be in connection with publicity of athletic events, honors, etc. The following constitutes directory 
information: the student’s name, address, photographs, telephone number, email, date and place of birth, major 
field of study, academic load, participation in officially recognized activities and sports, weight and height of 
members of athletic teams, dates of attendance, degrees, honors and awards received, class year in school, 
and most recent previous educational agency or institution attended. A student who does not wish any of this 
information to be released for a given semester should notify the Registrar in writing by the end of the second 
week of classes. Directory information is published in various forms during the year and Rensselaer can withhold 
information only in those cases where written requests are received in accordance with the above-mentioned 
guidelines. Students must fill out a request to prevent disclosure of directory information for each semester they 
wish to withhold such information. 
Copies of Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute’s complete Statement of Policy and Procedures in Compliance with 
the Family Educational Rights and Privacy Act may be obtained upon request from the Office of the Registrar. 
Any student who believes, after seeking correction through the internal grievance procedures specified in 
Rensselaer’s policy statement, that the Institute has failed to comply with the provisions of this Act, has the right 
to file a written complaint with the Family Policy Compliance Office, Department of Education, 400 Maryland 
Ave SW, Washington, D.C. 20202. 
FIRE ALARMS AND PROCEDURES 
The Institute will conduct fire drills during the fall, spring, and summer terms. A fire alarm is an Institute order to 
vacate the building. Familiarize yourself with exits and evacuation procedures and follow the directions of staff 
and fire safety officers. Failure to do so and/or to evacuate is very serious and may result in judicial action. 
Tampering with fire warning devices, fire protection systems, portable fire extinguishers and other fire safety 
equipment, creating a fire safety hazard, and/or activating a false alarm are serious offenses and will be dealt 
with as such. Additionally, any student who activates a false fire alarm is subject to a $200 fine, legal prosecution, 
and disciplinary action (including expulsion) in any of the following circumstances: 
• Knowingly reporting a false alarm 
• Malicious intent to set off the alarm 
• Avoidable accident 
• Second occurrence of carelessness 
When a fire alarm sounds in any Institute building, including Rensselaer-owned Fraternity and Sorority 
structures, it must be assumed to be legitimate. Therefore, the following procedure will be observed: 
Evacuate the building immediately and move away from the structure while awaiting the arrival of Public Safety 
and the Fire Department. No one is to re-enter a building or shut off the alarm system except Fire Department 
or Public Safety personnel. 
Page 38 
Rensselaer Handbook of Student Rights and Responsibilities, rev. January 6, 2025 
SECURITY TECHNOLOGY, ACCESS CONTROL SYSTEM, AND EMERGENCY PHONES 
The Institute has installed security technology, access control system, emergency exit alarms, and emergency 
phones to facilitate the safety and security of the campus. Tampering with security camera, access control 
devices, emergency exit alarms, and emergency phones creates a safety and security risk; these are serious 
offenses and will be treated as such. 
HAZING 
No individual or group may haze another at any time including initiation into or affiliation with any organization or 
ongoing association or membership on- or off-campus. Under the law of New York State, all organization 
constitutions and bylaws are automatically amended to prohibit hazing activities as defined by the Penal Law of the 
State of New York. 
Hazing is defined by Rensselaer as any conduct that subjects another person, whether physically, mentally, 
emotionally, or psychologically, to anything that may endanger, abuse, degrade, or intimidate the person as a 
condition of association with a group or organization, regardless of the person's consent or lack of consent. 
Such activities and situations include, but are not limited to, paddling in any form; forced consumption of alcohol 
or other drugs; creation of excessive fatigue; required calisthenics; "kidnapping;" physical and psychological 
shock; publicly wearing apparel which is conspicuous and not normally in good taste; engaging in public stunts 
and buffoonery; morally degrading or humiliating games and activities; late-night activities; work sessions which 
interfere with scholastic activities; activities which are not normally performed by the active membership; and 
any other activities which are not consistent with organization law, ritual, or policy, or the regulations and policies 
of the Institute. 
Member recruitment, orientation, education, and development programs must be constructive and strive to make 
individuals a part of the larger group by mutually understanding objectives and participating in programs. 
EXOTIC DANCERS 
Exotic dancing, stripping, and similar forms of activity are prohibited on Institute property or off-campus as part of 
a Rensselaer-recognized/affiliated student organization sanctioned or sponsored event or any event open to the 
public and/or nonmembers including, but not limited to, recruitment activities. 
FOG EVENTS 
The use of fog-generating equipment is prohibited without prior Institute approval. These fog-generating devices 
are frequently used at parties, performing arts events, and concerts to create atmosphere (generally in 
combination with lighting effects), but often have the effect of activating the smoke detectors of building fire alarm 
systems. 
CAMPUS CARD (ID) 
The campus card must be carried at all times and must be presented when requested by an Institute official, 
residence life staff member, a Rensselaer Union official, or campus Public Safety officer. 
The campus card is issued to active students at Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute and is identification for the 
Institute. The card is the property of Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute, issued by the Campus Card Office to the 
cardholder only. Use of the campus card can be revoked at the Institute's sole discretion for any violation of 
policies and procedures of its use. Access privileges of the card are deactivated when the student's active status 
ends. 
Campus cards are used for access to many buildings, your residence hall, meal plan, Rensselaer 
Page 39 
Rensselaer Handbook of Student Rights and Responsibilities, rev. January 6, 2025 
Advantage Dollars for campus food establishments, campus vending machines, and athletic events. 
INVOLUNTARY LEAVES AND WITHDRAWALS 
The Medical Director, the Director of the Counseling Center, and/or the Dean of Students may determine that a 
leave of absence or withdrawal may be imposed upon a student. This action may be taken if, in the opinion of 
either Director or Dean, a student exhibits behavior which creates, continues, or presents a risk of harm to the 
physical or mental health of the student concerned or to others, or which threatens serious disruption to Institute 
operations, programs, activities and/or damage to Institute facilities or property. The Dean of Students Office will, 
in its discretion, make exceptions to Institute regulations otherwise applicable to the student to the extent 
necessary to effectuate this leave of absence or withdrawal. This mandatory leave or withdrawal will be 
processed through the Dean of Students Office and is subject only to a written appeal to theVice Provost of 
Student Experience, if the student so chooses, within five (5) Institute business days after written notification. 
Action under this section shall not constitute disciplinary action against a student and shall not trigger any 
hearing or appeal rights under the Rensselaer Student Judicial System, provided, however, that separate 
disciplinary action may be taken if the student exhibits behavior that otherwise violates the Grounds for 
Disciplinary Action or other Institute policy, even if related to the conditions that result in mandatory leave or 
withdrawal. 
The Medical Director and the Dean of Students must consent to the readmission of any student who is granted 
or placed on a medical or psychological leave or withdrawal, in addition to the student complying with any other 
conditions for readmission that may have been imposed. 
LEAVE OF ABSENCE AFTER SIGNIFICANT PHYSICAL OR EMOTIONAL TRAUMA OR ILLNESS 
The Vice Provost for Student Experience may impose a leave of absence upon a student who has sustained an 
event which, in their judgment, has created, or may create in the future, impairment in the ability of the student 
to continue their education at Rensselaer at that time. 
In arriving at this judgment, the Vice Provost for Student Experience may request opinions from the 
Medical Director, the student's academic adviser, the student, their family, and other relevant parties. 
Policies regarding this involuntary leave shall be the same as set forth for other involuntary leaves or withdrawals 
initiated by the Medical Director, the Director of the Counseling Center, or the Dean of Students, except that the 
Vice Provost of Student Experience must also consent to the readmission of the student given a leave under 
this section. 
PARKING RULES AND REGULATIONS 
All motor vehicles (including motorcycles and mopeds) must be registered. Parking at Rensselaer is limited and 
student vehicles are restricted by permit to specific areas on campus. 
Parking permits and copies of the driving and parking regulations are available from the Parking Office or at: 
https://info.rpi.edu/parking-and-transportation. 
Parking regulations can be modified by the Parking and Transportation Office to meet changing needs. 
Students, faculty, and staff will be publicly notified of significant changes. Student ticket appeals are decided by 
the Student Motor Vehicle Court, a subcommittee of the Judicial Board defined within the Judicial Board bylaws 
Freshmen living in a residence hall are prohibited from bringing a motor vehicle to the Rensselaer campus. 
Vehicles parked on or contingent to the campus must comply with campus and municipal parking regulations or 
may be ticketed and towed at the owner's expense. 
Page 40 
Rensselaer Handbook of Student Rights and Responsibilities, rev. January 6, 2025 
RULES FOR MAINTENANCE OF PUBLIC ORDER 
New York State Education Law, Sections 6430-6435, requires all colleges and universities to adopt regulations 
for the "maintenance of public order on college campuses and other college property used for educational 
purposes and produce a program for the enforcement thereof." The law requires each college to file such rules 
and regulations with the New York State Education Department. 
New York State Education Law Sections 6430-6435 
The trustees or other governing board of every college chartered by the regents or incorporated by act of the 
legislature shall adopt rules and regulations for the maintenance of public order on college campuses and other 
college property used for educational purposes and produce a program for the enforcement thereof. Such rules 
and regulations shall prohibit, among other things, any action or situation which recklessly or intentionally 
endangers mental or physical health or involves the forced consumption of liquor or drugs for the purpose of 
initiation into or affiliation with any organization. Such rules and regulations shall govern the conduct of 
students, as well as visitors and other licensees and invitees on such campuses and property. The penalties for 
violations of such rules and regulations shall be clearly set forth therein and shall include provisions for the 
ejection of a violator from such campus and property, and in the case of a student violator his/her suspension, 
expulsion, or other appropriate disciplinary action and in the case of a student organization which authorizes 
such conduct, rescission of permission for that organization to operate on campus property. Such penalties 
shall be in addition to any penalty pursuant to the penal law or any other chapter to which a violator or 
organization may be subject. A copy of such rules and regulations shall be given to all students enrolled in said 
college and shall be deemed to be part of the bylaws of all organizations operating on said campus which shall 
review annually such bylaws with individuals affiliated with such organizations. 
Academic freedom is essential to a university community. Freedom of speech and freedom of assembly are 
essential to academic freedom. Every member of the academic community should be free to pursue full 
involvement in the educational process of the university without interference from others. All members of the 
university community should be able to express their views by words and actions and to express by words and 
actions their opposition to the views and opinions of others. In order to preserve these rights all members of the 
university community have a responsibility to conduct themselves so that such rights may be exercised without 
interfering with the rights of others and without fear of violence or injury or interference. 
The following rules and regulations are adopted to maintain public order on the university campus and other 
university property. 
1. Any act which would constitute a violation of federal, New York, or local law if committed off campus is 
prohibited on campus or on other university property. 
2. No unauthorized person or persons shall interfere with reasonable and free access to, exit from, and 
normal use of any university building, classroom, or other university premises. 
3. No unauthorized person or persons shall interfere with the freedom of movement or speech of any 
individual or group. 
4. When a speaker is the object of protest or controversy, no unauthorized person or persons shall take any 
sign or other demonstration impediments into the building where the speech is to take place. 
5. Every person who attends any lecture, speech, discussion, or public event shall treat all participants 
in an orderly and reasonably courteous manner. 
6. No unauthorized person or persons shall disrupt or interfere with classes, educational activities, or any 
events sponsored by any university officer or official, faculty group, or student group. 
7. No unauthorized person or persons shall utilize or threaten physical force, physical harassment, or 
physical obstruction. 
8. No person or persons shall use language or actions likely to provoke or encourage physical violence. 
Page 41 
Rensselaer Handbook of Student Rights and Responsibilities, rev. January 6, 2025 
9. No person or persons shall use, in public, language or gestures which are unreasonably abusive or obscene. 
10. No person or persons shall, without proper authority, occupy any university buildings or premises. 
11. No person or persons shall examine, disturb, or destroy university records without permission of the 
person authorized to deal with such records. 
12. No person or persons shall cause injury or damage to person or property. 
13. Any action or situation which recklessly or intentionally endangers mental or physical health or 
involves the forced consumption of liquor or drugs for the purpose of initiation into or affiliation with 
any organization is prohibited. 
14. The possession of dangerous weapons, chemicals, explosive devices, or materials including, but not 
limited to, firearms, air guns, prohibited knives (such as switch knives, swords, daggers, gravity knives, 
throwing stars, and knives with blades more than three inches long), ammunition, slingshots, metallic 
knuckles, bows and arrows, fireworks, and bombs is prohibited. 
15. In addition to complying with the requirements of the foregoing specific regulations, which are not 
exhaustive, members of the academic community shall conduct themselves in a manner which does not 
unreasonably disrupt the academic community or unreasonably infringe upon the rights of others. 
Procedures 
When requested by the Dean of Students or designee, persons engaged in any demonstration, meeting, or other 
occasion on campus or on Institute property used for educational purposes, or on other Institute property shall 
identify themselves in a manner satisfactory to the Dean or designee. Only persons who are current students, 
faculty, and staff will be permitted to engage in such activities on Rensselaer property, and may only do so by 
complying with these procedures. 
Only peaceful demonstrations are appropriate in an academic community and the Trustees are confident that no 
member or group of the Institute community will go beyond the bounds set by these regulations. In order to 
maintain the safety and to safeguard the interests of all members of the Institute community, any group or 
individual planning a demonstration must submit an Application For Approval of Peaceful Demonstration to the 
Dean of Students Office at least seven (7) days prior to the proposed demonstration date and include its 
proposed location and the object of the intended protest, or other purpose. If a situation emerges for which a 
seven-day notice is neither appropriate nor practical, the Dean of Students shall exercise reasonable discretion 
by reviewing the application to reasonably assure student safety and to safeguard the interests of all members 
of the Rensselaer community. 
At any demonstration, meeting, or other occasion, judgment as to whether the regulations are being observed 
shall be made at the scene by the Dean of Students or designee. The Dean of Students or designee may, before 
making a judgment, consult with appropriate individuals at the scene who are not involved in the demonstration, 
meeting, or other occasion. 
Responsibility for exercising such judgment shall rest solely with the Dean of Students or designee. It must be 
emphasized that judgment as to whether the regulations are being observed shall not be exercised by 
demonstrators, those demonstrated against, or spectators in contradiction to the expressed judgment of the 
Dean of Students or designee, except at the risk of such individuals. 
If the Dean of Students or designee at the scene of any demonstration, meeting, or other gathering determines 
that one or more of the regulations are being breached, theywill request the participants to modify their conduct 
so as to comply with the regulations, indicating briefly and informally the nature of the breach of regulations 
and the requested corrective action. All participants and spectators shall comply immediately, fully and 
cooperatively with the requests of the Dean of Students or designee. 
Should any participant or spectator decline to comply with the requests of the Dean of Students or designee, 
they shall be subject to ejection from the campus and, in the case of students, faculty, and other staff, subject to 
disciplinary action by the university including suspension, expulsion, or other disciplinary action. Thereafter if, in 
the judgment of the President or any one of the President's designees, there appears to be a clear and present 
Page 42 
Rensselaer Handbook of Student Rights and Responsibilities, rev. January 6, 2025 
danger of injury to person or property, or disruption of university operations is threatened, the President or 
designee shall seek the aid of Public Safety, the courts, or other civil authority in maintaining or restoring order 
including, when appropriate, ejection of the violators from the campus or other Institute property. 
Hearings and Disciplinary Action 
In the event that any student, group of students, or student organization becomes subject to disciplinary action 
as provided for in these rules and regulations, steps shall be taken to determine whether: 
• The regulations have been breached; or 
• The person(s) so violating willfully disobeyed any reasonable request of the Dean of Students or 
designee. 
a. In the case of a student, group of students, or organization comprised primarily of students, all 
alleged violations of the rules will be adjudicated within Rensselaer's Judicial System in accordance 
with its procedures which are published by the Institute. 
b. No person who was involved in any incident which is the subject of a disciplinary hearing shall sit in 
judgment. 
c. Nothing in these rules shall prevent an informal discussion and settlement of an incident through 
normal administrative procedures if the alleged violator shall request such informal settlement in 
writing. Settlement of such informal discussion shall provide for expulsion, suspension, rescission of 
permission for an organization to operate on public property, or other appropriate disciplinary action. 
Informal settlement shall not bar the right of appeal. 
d. Violations alleged against members of the faculty shall be adjudicated in accordance with the Faculty 
Handbook. 
e. Violations alleged against staff members shall be adjudicated in accordance with the Human 
Resources Policy Guidelines. 
Members of the Institute community are as citizens subject to penalties. In addition, they are subject to rules 
pertinent to the Institute community. Therefore, any student may be subject to disciplinary action, as provided 
herein, in addition to such penalties as may be imposed by civil authorities. In the event that visitors, licensees 
or invitees, or other persons who are not members of the academic community shall decline to comply with the 
request of the Dean of Students or designee or to comply with these rules, such persons shall be advised that 
they are no longer welcome on campus or on other Institute property and shall be requested to leave. If such 
persons fail to comply with such request, the President or the President's designees may resort to the courts or 
other civil authority to enforce the request. 
SIGN POLICY 
All members of the Rensselaer community are expected to abide by the campus sign policy for non-residential 
buildings that is detailed below. This policy was developed to regulate the style, content, and posting of signs and 
posters as a means of reducing the litter and visual clutter on campus. No business or organization external to the 
RPI community may post anywhere on the RPI campus without the express permission of the Center for Career and 
Professional Development, Rensselaer Union Executive Board, the Dean of Students Office, or an Academic 
Department of the Institute. It is important that this policy be reviewed before signs are posted.  
Definition 
The term sign or poster, as used herein, refers to any written or graphical material on paper, cardboard, cloth, or any 
other materials placed on campus for public display for the purpose of advertising or information dissemination. 
Style and Content  
1. The Institute reserves the right to remove signs deemed to be graphically inappropriate, profane, libelous, in 
unsightly condition, or that contain outdated information.  
2. The name and email address of the group or person posting the sign must be on each sign.  
Page 43 
Rensselaer Handbook of Student Rights and Responsibilities, rev. January 6, 2025 
3. Every sign must have a clearly visible and legible takedown date on the bottom right corner; signs not 
advertising an event date should also include the original posting date. For signs advertising events, the 
takedown date must be at most three days after the event. For all signs not advertising an event, the takedown 
date must be at most three weeks from the date they are posted.  
4. Signs may be carried if they do not disrupt classes, traffic, or other educational and administrative functions of 
the Institute or members of the community.  
5. All signs advertising events must include the date of the event.  
6. Signs from external organizations must clearly identify the RPI organization sponsoring the poster and include 
contact information for the external organization. 
Posting Signs 
1. Do not use materials that may be damaging to the postering surface, such as nails, screws, chalk, adhesive
backed signs (bumper sticker type).  
2. Do not paint directly on surfaces.  
3. Do not use duct tape.  
4. Outdoor signs must not be posted on telephone or power poles, lamp posts, trees, fences, doors, windows, 
benches, or the ground. 
5. Outdoor signs must also not be posted on Institute buildings with the exceptions of the Low Center for Industrial 
Innovation (CII), Darrin Communications Center (DCC), and the Jonsson Engineering Center (JEC).  
6. Signs must not be posted on the internal walls, floors, carpets, or doors of any building except as permitted by 
those having jurisdiction over that building.  
7. Signs must not be posted in such a way as to cover or obscure signs already on display.  
8. No sign may be posted in excess, as defined by the Director of Student Activities in the Rensselaer Union, at 
any postering location.  
9. Signs placed or carried in a building must comply with rules established by those having jurisdiction over that 
building.  
10. No sign shall be posted in such a way that its removal shall be excessively difficult or dangerous.   
Posting Banners 
1. Banners may be hung with string on the footbridge, and if requiring the use of a ladder to hang, must be 
approved by the Director of Student Activities in the Rensselaer Union or the Dean of Students Office. 
2. Banners hung overhead in the CII walkway must be approved by the Director of Student Activities in the 
Rensselaer Union. 
Posting on Outdoor Bulletin Boards 
1. Only signs containing information pertinent to Institute activities or interests may be posted in campus bulletin 
spaces. 
2. Signs may be mounted on bulletin boards only with thumbtacks and staples.  
3. No more than one of any particular sign may be posted on any side of a bulletin board.  
4. Signs posted on bulletin boards may not have an area greater than 4 square feet.  
Removing Signs, Posters, or Banners 
All removed signs must be disposed of properly on or after the takedown date by any member of the Institute 
community. Signs advertising events must be removed by the person or group posting the sign within three days 
following the event. All other signage must be removed within three weeks of posting. Properly posted signs may 
not be removed, unless as authorized by the person or group posting the sign, before these established dates. A 
group or individual may remove any sign on or after the takedown date to place a new sign.  
Campus Buildings & Grounds may perform a takedown of posters with express notification and subsequent 
approval from the Dean of Students, the Grand Marshal, and the Director of Student Activities when postering 
reaches an excessive amount or at the start/end of a semester. 
Page 44 
Rensselaer Handbook of Student Rights and Responsibilities, rev. January 6, 2025 
Takedown dates shall not apply to signs set up by the Rensselaer Union containing information about this policy. 
Enforcement of Rules 
Revisions to this policy must be approved by the Student Senate and the Dean of Students Office. In extraordinary 
cases, these rules may be waived by the Director of Student Activities, the Grand Marshal, the Dean of Students, 
the President, or one of the Vice Presidents/Provosts of the Institute. Disagreements concerning waiving and 
interpretation of rules shall be resolved through discussion by these parties. 
Potential outcomes for sign policy violations may include: 
1. Immediate removal of signs 
2. Written warning from the Dean of Students Office and/or Campus Buildings & Grounds 
3. Referral to the Dean of Students Office 
4. Removal of privileges to poster in the Rensselaer Union 
5. Monetary fines levied by the Executive Board on funded clubs 
6. Removal of privileges to poster on campus 
These rules will be superseded for student political signs during campaigning for student elections by the election 
rules passed by the Student Senate.  
STEAM TUNNELS, DESIGNATED CONFINED SPACES, AND ROOFS 
Rensselaer's campus has tunnels and designated confined spaces for access to steam pipes and utility chases 
at various locations. Confined spaces are marked with signs indicating that the space has been designated as 
a confined space, and entry is allowed by permit only. Because of the danger inherent in these locations, 
steam tunnels and designated confined spaces may be entered only by authorized personnel. Access to any 
roof of any Institute Building is prohibited unless specifically authorized by the Division of Administration and 
Environmental Health and Safety. Students found to have entered a steam tunnel, any designated confined 
space, or unauthorized access to a roof on an Institute Building are subject to disciplinary action. 
USE OF INSTITUTE BUILDINGS AND FACILITIES 
Individual students or groups who wish to reserve buildings, classrooms, or outdoor facilities at Rensselaer 
should consult with the Facilities Coordinator or the specified Scheduler who is responsible for referring such 
requests to the appropriate departments. Students should also be familiar with the “Rensselaer Guide for Events, 
Rooms, and Services” and the rooms and spaces that may be requested through the Rensselaer’s Room 
Reservations System webpage https://rpi.emscloudservice.com/web/ 
Sponsoring groups or individuals are responsible for reasonable control and care of participants, spectators, and 
property during events under their sponsorship. 
SOLICITATION AND DISTRIBUTION 
Only Institute administrative unit or departments, and recognized student organizations with express permission, 
may conduct fundraising or solicitation activities on the Rensselaer campus, or distribute materials on campus 
property, including but not limited to the residence halls. No outside organization or person may solicit or 
distribute materials on the campus. Student organizations wishing to set up booths or otherwise conduct such 
activities on Rensselaer property must obtain permission from the Rensselaer administrative unit or department 
with responsibility for management of the particular building or facility before doing so. The organization should 
seek guidance from the Director of the Union or Director of Student Activities if unsure about where to seek 
permission. 
Page 45 
Rensselaer Handbook of Student Rights and Responsibilities, rev. January 6, 2025 
RENSSELAER UNION POLICIES 
The Rensselaer Union has established policies and guidelines concerning the use of the Union and its facilities. 
The following is a partial list of the policies that are likely to affect a user of the building. 
I. UNION AFFILIATION 
A. Individuals 
Rensselaer students, faculty, staff, alumni, and their spouses and dependents shall be considered members of 
the Rensselaer community. As such, they, and their invited guests, shall be allowed the use of the Union building 
and facilities. Only activity fee-paying students may participate in student elections and hold office in clubs. 
B. Clubs and Organizations 
Clubs and organizations are divided into five categories. These categories are ranked in order of priority for use 
of the Union building and facilities. They are, in order, Funded, Recognized, Affiliated, Forming, and Not 
Recognized. In the case of the first four categories, they must meet the criteria for club approval. 
• Funded denotes those clubs and activities that have been approved by the Executive Board and are 
financially responsible to the Rensselaer Union. 
• Recognized denotes those clubs and activities approved by the Executive Board that are not fiscally 
responsible to the Rensselaer Union. 
• Affiliated, in general, denotes those activities that are not recognized by the Executive Board, but are 
recognized by some branch of Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute (e.g., the Dean of Students Office, academic 
departments, etc.). 
• Forming are those clubs that have started the process of becoming a Union recognized club. 
• Not Recognized includes all activities that have not applied for classification, or do not meet the 
requirements for any other classification. 
II. USE OF THE BUILDING 
A. Public Restrictions 
1. Only members of the Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute community and their invited guests are 
permitted to use the services of the Rensselaer Union. 
2. Consistent with the laws of the State of New York, no dogs or other pets are allowed in the building 
(except service dogs). 
B. Scheduling 
1. 
2. 
Meeting Rooms 
Persons or groups wishing to reserve a meeting room should contact the Reservation Services 
Coordinator in the Rensselaer Union Administration Office. Organizations that the Union funds or 
recognizes shall have the highest priority. The Rensselaer Union shall set additional policies 
regarding reserving meeting rooms. 
McNeil Room 
The Union shall define the scheduling policy for reserving the McNeil Room. Persons or groups 
wishing to reserve the McNeil Room should contact the Reservation Services Coordinator in the 
Rensselaer Union Administration Office as far in advance of the event as possible. 
Page 46 
Rensselaer Handbook of Student Rights and Responsibilities, rev. January 6, 2025 
C. Restrictions 
1. 
2. 
Tobacco Use Policy 
Smoking and the use of tobacco products are prohibited in all Institute facilities and outdoor areas. 
Alcohol Policy 
Alcohol is prohibited in the Rensselaer Union with the exemption of the Clubhouse Pub and other 
spaces in the Union that receive Alcohol Review Committee permits and other permits as needed. 
D. Advertising 
1. Sign Board Policy 
This is for Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute events. Sign boards and banners are allowed to be 
displayed on the south balcony by reservation. Other spaces inside and outside the Union building 
require special permission. 
For the complete sign board policy and to reserve space, contact the Reservation Services 
Coordinator in the Rensselaer Union Administration Office. 
2. Poster Policy 
There are several poster boards in the Union designated for general posting. Some areas are 
restricted to posters for certain activities and groups. All posters must be approved and stamped in 
the Rensselaer Union Administration Office; a maximum of five may be placed in the Union. During 
school elections, additional restrictions may also apply. A list of election rules is available from the 
Student Senate Elections Commissionor in the Rensselaer Union Administration Office. 
3. Flyers Policy 
Distribution of flyers and table tents is for Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute events and must be 
coordinated with the Rensselaer Union Administration Office. 
E. Political and Religious Activity 
Detailed information about student government policy related to political and religious activity in the 
Union, or activity conducted by the Union or one of its funded organizations, is available on the 
Rensselaer Union website: http://www.union.rpi.edu. 
RENSSELAER UNION CONSTITUTION 
In order to provide students with the most recent version of the Rensselaer Union Constitution, the complete 
document has been placed on the web at: https://sites.google.com/view/rpistugov/record.  
All students are encouraged to familiarize themselves with the official Union Constitution. As always, a hard 
copy of this document is available in the Union Administration or the Dean of Students Office.
 Page 47 
Rensselaer Handbook of Student Rights and Responsibilities, rev. January 6, 2025 
Rensselaer Handbook of Student Rights and Responsibilities, rev. January 6, 2025 Page 48 
 
 
INDEX 
Academic Integrity 
 
17 
 
Sign Policy 
 
43 
Alcohol and Other Drugs Policy 26 Solicitation and Distribution Policy 45 
Institute-Recognized Student Groups And  Steam Tunnels 45 
Alcohol 29 Student Bill of Rights, Sexual Misconduct 24 
Appeals, Judicial 11 Student Conduct for Individuals and Groups 8 
Bill of Rights & Responsibilities, Student 4 Student Judicial Advisers 13 
Buildings and Facilities, Use of Institute 45 Student Living and Learning 34 
Campus Card (ID) 39 Student Rights in the Classroom 5 
Classroom, Student Rights in the 5 Technology Commercialization and  
Complaints, Reporting Discrimination 25 Intellectual Property 35 
Cyber Citizenship Policy 34 Title IX Coordinators 25 
Harassment, Sexual Misconduct, or  Tobacco Use Policy 33 
Retaliation 23 Types of Disciplinary Action 14 
Components of the Judicial System 10 Unmanned Aerial Vehicles 35 
Computer Use at Rensselaer 34 Withdrawals, Involuntary 40 
Demonstrations, On Campus (See Rules 
For Maintenance of Public Order) 
 
41 
  
Disciplinary Action, Grounds for 8   
Disciplinary Action, Groups 14   
Disciplinary Action, Types of 14   
Disclosure of Disciplinary Action 15   
Drug Policy 29   
Exotic Dancers 39   
Faculty Academic Board 12   
Family Educational Rights and 
Privacy Act (FERPA) 
 
37 
  
Fire Alarms and Procedures 38   
Fog Events 39   
Good Samaritan Policy 32   
Grade Appeal (Faculty Academic Board) 12   
Grounds for Disciplinary Action 8   
Hazing 39   
Hearing Boards, Judicial 12   
Intellectual Property 35   
Involuntary Leaves of Absence 
And Withdrawals 
 
40 
  
Joint Board 13   
Judicial Board 12   
Judicial Inquiry 10   
Judicial System, Components of 10   
Jurisdiction Within the Rensselaer Student 
Judicial System 
 
10 
  
Leave of Absence, Involuntary 40   
Legal Counsel in the Judicial Process 14   
Motor Vehicle Registration 40   
Non-Discrimination/Equal Opportunity    
Policy 20   
Notice Pursuant to the "Campus Sex 
Crimes Prevention Act” and Campus 
Crime Reporting and Statistics 
 
25 
  
Parking Rules and Regulations 
Policy on Transcript Notation 
(Suspension and Expulsion) 
40 
 
15 
  
Rensselaer Union Constitution Reference 47   
Rensselaer Union Policies 46   
Review Board 13   
Rules for Maintenance of Public Order 41   
Sexual Misconduct Policy 23   
Dean of Students Office 
Academy Hall, Suite 4629 
Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute 
110 8th Street Troy, NY 12180-3590 USA 
Rensselaer admits qualified students without regard to race, color, religion, sex, pregnancy, sexual orientation, gender 
identity, gender expression, age, marital status, national origin, citizenship status, disability, military status, veteran status, 
genetic information, genetic predisposition, domestic violence victim status, or any other basis prohibited by law. 
Page 49 
Rensselaer Handbook of Student Rights and Responsibilities, rev. January 6, 2025 